2022

research-article INC

0010.1

77/1751 437221 49572Journal of the Intensive Care Society

Koozi et al.

<!-- image -->

Original article

## A simple mortality prediction model for sepsis patients in intensive care

<!-- image -->

Hazem Koozi 1,2* , Adina Lidestam 1* , Maria Lengquist 1,3 , Patrik Johnsson 1,4  and Attila Frigyesi 1,3

## Abstract

Background: Sepsis is common in the intensive care unit (ICU). Two of the ICU's most widely used mortality prediction models are the Simplified Acute Physiology Score 3 (SAPS-3) and the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score. We aimed to assess the mortality prediction performance of SAPS-3 and SOFA upon ICU admission for sepsis and find a simpler mortality prediction model for these patients to be used in clinical practice and when conducting studies.

Methods: A  retrospective  study  of  adult  patients  fulfilling  the  Sepsis-3  criteria  admitted  to  four  general  ICUs  was performed. A simple prognostic model was created using backward stepwise multivariate logistic regression. The area under the curve (AUC) of SAPS-3, SOFA and the simple model was assessed.

Results: One thousand nine hundred eighty four admissions were included. A simple six-parameter model consisting of age, immunosuppression, Glasgow Coma Scale, body temperature, C-reactive protein and bilirubin had an AUC of 0.72 (95% confidence interval (CI) 0.69-0.75) for 30-day mortality, which was non-inferior to SAPS-3 (AUC 0.75, 95% CI 0.72-0.77) ( p =  0.071). SOFA had an AUC of 0.67 (95% CI 0.64-0.70) and was inferior to SAPS-3 ( p &lt; 0.001) and our simple model ( p =  0.0019).

Conclusion: SAPS-3 has a lower prognostic value in sepsis than in the general ICU population. SOFA performs less well than SAPS-3. Our simple six-parameter model predicts mortality just as well as SAPS-3 upon ICU admission for sepsis, allowing the design of simple studies and performance monitoring.

## Keywords

Critical care, intensive care units, mortality, prognosis, risk adjustment, sepsis

## Introduction

## Background

Sepsis is one of the most frequent diagnoses in intensive care units (ICUs), accounting for around 30% of all ICU admissions  in  Europe. 1,2   It  is  also  one  of  the  leading causes of death in the world. 3  The criteria for sepsis are suspected or documented infection and an acute increase of  two  Sequential  Organ  Failure  Assessment  (SOFA) points or more. 4

The  high  incidence  and  mortality  of  sepsis  make reliable and easy ICU prognostication of septic patients crucial.  The  Acute  Physiologic  and  Chronic  Health Evaluation  II  (APACHE  II)  and  the  Simplified  Acute Physiology Score 3 (SAPS-3) are two of the most commonly used models for the assessment of illness severity and prediction of outcomes in the ICU. 5  While SAPS-3 has been shown to have high sensitivity and specificity, it  is  developed  for  a  mixed  ICU  cohort. 6   However, the ICU population is heterogeneous, and neither SAPS-3 nor APACHE scores are designed to estimate mortality rates  for  any  specific  ICU  subgroup.  Both  SAPS-3 and APACHE II have demonstrated good mortality prediction in  postoperative  surgical  patients. 7   Studies  have  also shown SAPS-3 to have good discriminatory power and calibration,  although  overestimating  hospital  mortality in  a  mixed  ICU  population. 8-12   However,  studies  have indicated  that  SAPS-3  is  challenging  to  use  in  clinical practice due to its many variables. 13  The SOFA score has previously  demonstrated  good  prognostic  accuracy  in predicting  hospital  mortality  in  patients  with  suspected infection admitted to the ICU. Still, it is mainly intended for measuring and monitoring organ failure. 14,15

1   Department of Clinical Medicine, Anaesthesiology and Intensive Care, Lund University, Lund, Sweden

2   Kristianstad Central Hospital, Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, Kristianstad, Sweden

3   Skåne University Hospital, Intensive and Perioperative Care, Lund, Sweden

4   Skåne University Hospital, Intensive and Perioperative Care, Malmö, Sweden

*These authors contributed equally to this work.

## Corresponding author:

Hazem Koozi, Kristianstad Central Hospital, Anaesthesia and Intensive Care, J A Hedlunds väg 5, Kristianstad, Skåne SE-29133, Sweden. Email: hazem.koozi@med.lu.se

<!-- image -->

Journal of the Intensive Care Society 2023, Vol. 24(4) 372  -378 © The Intensive Care Society 2022

<!-- image -->

https://doi.org/10.1177/17511437221149572 Article reuse guidelines: sagepub.com/journals-permissions DOI: 10.1177/17511437221149572 journals.sagepub.com/home/jics

<!-- image -->

## Objectives

This  study  aimed  to  assess  the  prognostic  performance regarding  mortality  of  SAPS-3  and  SOFA  score  for patients with sepsis (according to Sepsis-3) admitted to the ICU and to find a simpler model with fewer parameters  but  maintained  predictive  value.  Such  a  mortality prediction model could facilitate future studies and performance monitoring.

## Methods

## Study design and setting

This  study  was  a  retrospective  multicentre  observational study including adult patients fulfilling the Sepsis-3 criteria admitted to one of four mixed surgical and medical ICUs between 2015 and 2018. This study did not include patients admitted to specialised ICUs (cardiothoracic or neurosurgical).  The  Strengthening  the  Reporting  of  Observational Studies  in  Epidemiology  (STROBE)  guidelines  were followed. 16

## Participants

Patients fulfilling the Sepsis-3 criteria with a total SOFA score of 2 or more on ICU admission were included. All admitted patients had an assumed baseline SOFA score of 0. To establish the presence of suspected infection, included admissions had to fulfil the following criteria: At least one blood culture collected within 24  h of ICU admission and antibiotics  administrated  within  24  h  before  to  72  h  after blood culture collection. These criteria were in accordance with the Sepsis-3 guidelines. 4  Patients directly transferred from  another  ICU,  planned  ICU  admissions  following elective surgery and patients with cardiac arrest within 6  h prior, to 1  h after ICU admission were excluded.

## Data sources

Data collection was performed by multiple trained data collectors  using  standardised  and  clearly  defined  guidelines. Data such as comorbidities, physiological parameters and laboratory findings were collected from electronic medical records. In addition, SOFA parameters, survival data, age and  sex  were  collected  from  the  Patient  Administrative System for Intensive Care Units (PASIV A).

## Variables

The worst recorded value 6  h prior, to 1  h after ICU admission was documented regarding physiological and laboratory parameters. SOFA and SAPS-3 scores were calculated based on the worst recorded values 1 h prior, to 1  h after ICU admission. Immunosuppression was defined as immunosuppressive treatment such as chemotherapy or neutropaenia with absolute neutrophil count &lt; 1.5 × 10 9 /L before ICU admission. Corticosteroid treatment was only recorded for a treatment duration of more than 3  days before ICU admission.  Septic  shock  was  defined  as  vasopressor  use and  lactate &gt; 2  mmol/L  at  ICU  admission.  The  patients were divided into two subgroups based on the outcome: Alive more than 30 days after ICU admission (survivors) and dead within 30 days from ICU admission (non-survivors).  We  used  the  Swedish  2016  SAPS-3  calibration, which estimates the 30-day mortality, to calculate the estimated mortality ratio (EMR). 17  Therefore, we used 30-day mortality  as  the  mortality  measure  when  dividing  the patients.

## Statistics

The two-sample Wilcoxon rank-sum test (Mann-Whitney U-test) was used to test for a difference in the continuous variable's median. The two-proportions Z-test (Chisquared test) was used to test for a difference in proportions. p -Values of less than 0.05 were considered significant. Backward  stepwise  multivariate  logistic  regression  was performed with 30-day mortality as the outcome and the parameters with the highest significance from the univariate logistic regression as factors. This method begins with a  complete  model  including  several  variables  and  then removes  one  variable  after  another  to  create  a  reduced model with the most significant independent variables. The area  under  the  receiver  operating  characteristic  (ROC) curve (AUC) was used to assess the predictive power of our models. Differences in AUC were tested with a method by DeLong et al. 18

## Ethics

This study was approved by a Regional Ethical Review Board and conformed to the Declaration of Helsinki.

## Results

## Participants

A total of 7556 ICU admissions were identified, where 2223  admissions  fulfilled  the  inclusion  criteria,  222 admissions were excluded, and 17 patients were lost to follow-up. Therefore, the total number of patients included in the study was 1984.

## Descriptive statistics

The 30-day mortality was 25.3%. Survivors were younger than  non-survivors  ( p &lt; 0.001).  Septic  shock  was  more common  in  non-survivors  than  survivors  ( p &lt; 0.001). Survivors were likelier to have a higher body mass index (BMI)  than  non-survivors  ( p =  0.028). No  difference between the sexes regarding 30-day mortality could be found. The median SAPS-3 score at ICU admission was 63  for  survivors  and  74  for  non-survivors. The  median SOFA score at ICU admission was seven for survivors and nine for non-survivors. See Table 1.

Our analyses found almost all documented comorbidities  to  be  more  frequent  in  non-survivors  than  survivors, except for asthma or chronic obstructive pulmonary disease BMI: body mass index; SAPS: Simplified Acute Physiology Score; EMR: estimated mortality rate; SOFA: Sequential Organ Failure Assessment;

Table 1. Characteristics of the studied patient population.

| Parameter number               | All 1984 (100%)   | Alive > 30days   | Deceased ⩽ 30days   | p - Value*   |   Missing (%) |
|--------------------------------|-------------------|------------------|---------------------|--------------|---------------|
|                                |                   | 1482 (74.7%)     | 502 (25.3%)         |              |               |
| General characteristics        |                   |                  |                     |              |               |
| Age, years                     | 69 (59-76)        | 68 (57-75)       | 72 (64-78)          | < 0.001      |             0 |
| Male sex, %                    | 58.1              | 57.9             | 58.6                | 0.83         |             0 |
| BMI, kg/m 2                    | 26.6 (23.2-30.9)  | 26.8 (23.4-31.2) | 26.0 (22.8-30.2)    | 0.028        |            21 |
| Septic shock, %                | 39.5              | 36.5             | 48.2                | < 0.001      |             0 |
| Morbidity measures             |                   |                  |                     |              |               |
| SAPS-3 score at admission      | 65 (57-75)        | 63 (55-71)       | 74 (65-82)          | < 0.001      |             0 |
| EMRSAPS-3 Swe, %               | 28                | 24               | 47                  | < 0.001      |             0 |
| EMRSAPS-3, %                   | 46                | 42               | 64                  | < 0.001      |             0 |
| SOFA score at admission        | 7 (5-10)          | 7 (5-9)          | 9 (6-12)            | < 0.001      |             1 |
| Comorbidities                  |                   |                  |                     |              |               |
| Immunosuppression, %           | 12.2              | 10.5             | 17.1                | < 0.001      |             0 |
| Corticosteroids, %             | 14.3              | 13.0             | 18.3                | 0.0038       |             0 |
| Diabetes Mellitus, %           | 24.2              | 24.2             | 24.3                | 1.00         |             0 |
| Cardiovascular disease, %      | 46.0              | 43.9             | 52.2                | 0.0013       |             0 |
| Ischaemic heart disease, %     | 19.0              | 19.0             | 19.1                | 0.99         |             0 |
| Peripheral vascular disease, % | 6.9               | 5.7              | 10.2                | 0.001        |             0 |
| Atrial fibrillation, %         | 18.2              | 17.4             | 20.5                | 0.14         |             0 |
| Heart failure, %               | 15.3              | 13.6             | 20.1                | < 0.001      |             0 |
| Stroke/TIA, %                  | 12.3              | 11.4             | 14.9                | 0.045        |             0 |
| Asthma/COPD, %                 | 19.1              | 20.5             | 14.9                | 0.0075       |             0 |
| Liver disease, %               | 5.8               | 5.1              | 7.8                 | 0.037        |             0 |
| Renal disease, %               | 11.3              | 10.7             | 13.3                | 0.17         |             0 |
| Malignancy, %                  | 13.7              | 12.6             | 16.9                | 0.016        |             0 |
| Physiological parameters       |                   |                  |                     |              |               |
| Heart rate, bpm                | 115 (96-130)      | 114 (97-130)     | 116 (95-134)        | 0.32         |           0.6 |
| Systolic blood pressure, mmHg  | 100 (79-124)      | 100 (80-126)     | 92 (75-120)         | < 0.001      |           1.7 |
| Respiratory rate, /min         | 30 (24-38)        | 30 (23-37)       | 31 (24-40)          | < 0.001      |           3.9 |
| GCS, mean ( ± 1 SD)            | 12.3 ( ± 3.57)    | 12.4 ( ± 3.49)   | 11.8 ( ± 3.78)      | < 0.001      |           3.7 |
| SpO2, %                        | 89 (80-95)        | 90 (80-95)       | 88 (80-93)          | 0.029        |           0.7 |
| Body temperature, °C           | 37.5 (36.3-38.5)  | 37.6 (36.5-38.6) | 37.0 (36.0-38.3)    | < 0.001      |           1.6 |
| Vasopressor support, %         | 37.6              | 25.3             | 44.2                | < 0.001      |             0 |
| Biochemistry                   |                   |                  |                     |              |               |
| CRP, mg/L                      | 105 (33-224)      | 93 (29-212)      | 136 (52-265)        | < 0.001      |           7.1 |
| WBC, 10 9 /L                   | 13.8 (8.7-19.9)   | 13.8 (8.8-19.9   | 13.9 (8.5-20.0)     | 0.91         |           0.5 |
| Platelet count, 10 9 /L        | 208 (140-292)     | 213 (145-296)    | 197 (115-284)       | < 0.001      |             6 |
| Lactate, mmol/L                | 2.7 (1.4-5.1)     | 2.6 (1.4-4.8)    | 3.3 (1.7 -5.8)      | < 0.001      |           3.6 |
| APTT                           | 30 (27-36)        | 30 (26-35)       | 31 (28-41)          | 0.0021       |            61 |
| Creatinine, µmol/L             | 116 (76-207)      | 110 (74-188)     | 148 (84-252)        | < 0.001      |           3.2 |
| Bilirubin, µmol/L              | 11 (7-20)         | 11 (7-19)        | 13 (8-26)           | < 0.001      |           6.5 |
| pH                             | 7.3 (7.2-7.4)     | 7.3 (7.2-7.4)    | 7.3 (7.2-7.4)       | 0.015        |            53 |

TIA: transient ischaemic attack; COPD: chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; GCS: Glasgow Coma Scale; SpO

2

: peripheral oxygen saturation;

CRP: C-reactive protein; WBC: white blood cell count; APTT: activated partial thromboplastin time; pH: hydrogen ion concentration.

Values presented as medians and interquartile range or percentages, with the exception of GCS, which is presented as means and standard deviations (SD).

*Calculated using the two-samples Wilcoxon rank-sum test (Mann-Whitney U-test) and the two-proportions Z-test (Chi-squared test) as appropriate.

(COPD), which was more common among survivors than non-survivors. Only 14.9% of patients in the non-survivor group had a diagnosis of asthma or COPD, compared to 20.5% of patients in the survivor group ( p =  0.0075). The prevalence  of  documented  comorbidities  did  not  differ between  survivors  and  non-survivors  regarding  diabetes mellitus (type I and II), ischaemic heart disease, atrial fibrillation and renal disease. See Table 1.

Non-survivors  had  lower  systolic  blood  pressure, higher  respiratory  rate,  lower  Glasgow  Coma  Scale (GCS) score, lower peripheral oxygen saturation (SpO 2 ) and lower body temperature than survivors. A higher percentage of non-survivors than survivors needed vasopressor support (44.2% and 25.3%, respectively). There was no  difference  in  heart  rate  between  the  two  groups ( p =  0.32).  Non-survivors  had  higher  C-reactive  protein

Figure 1. Multivariate logistic regression of a simple sixparameter model consisting of age, immunosuppression, Glasgow Coma Scale, body temperature, C-reactive protein and bilirubin in predicting 30-day mortality in sepsis patients admitted to the ICU. ICU: intensive care unit; GCS: Glasgow Coma Scale; CRP: C-reactive protein.

<!-- image -->

(CRP) levels, lower platelet counts, higher lactate levels, higher  creatinine  levels  and  higher  bilirubin  levels.  No difference was observed between the two groups regarding white blood cell count (WBC). See Table 1.

## Multivariate logistic regression

Out of the 36 parameters in Table 1, 24 were significant in univariate logistic regression analyses (see Supplemental Material).  Subsequently,  these  24  were  used  in  a  backward  stepwise  multivariate  logistic  regression  analysis. Several  simpler  models  were  created  using  backward stepwise multivariate logistic regression, each including four to six variables, and the simple model with the highest AUC was chosen. A six-parameter model was found with odds ratios (OR) of more than one for age, immunosuppression, CRP and bilirubin and OR of less than one for GCS score and body temperature. See Figure 1.

SAPS-3, on ICU admission, had an AUC of 0.75 (95% CI 0.72-0.77). Our six-parameter model had an AUC of 0.72 (95% CI 0.69-0.75) with no difference in predictive strength  compared  to  SAPS-3  ( p =  0.071).  SOFA  score upon ICU admission had an AUC of 0.67 (95% CI 0.640.70). Both SAPS-3 and our model had a better predictive value  than  the  SOFA  score  ( p &lt; 0.001  and p =  0.0019, respectively). See Figure 2.

Internal  validation  of  the  six-parameter  model  was undertaken  through  five-fold  cross-validation  with  50 repeats, which yielded an  AUC  of  0.71 (95%  CI 0.66-0.76).

## Discussion

SAPS-3 is a well-known and widely used model in ICUs worldwide. SAPS-3 is well-studied in general ICU populations and has relatively high sensitivity and specificity, with  several  studies  showing  an AUC  of  0.80-0.85. 8-11 This is further supported by a recent study in a large general ICU population, which showed an AUC of 0.85 for SAPS-3. 19   However,  SAPS-3  is  not  explicitly  designed for  sepsis  patients,  and  the  discriminative  power  of SAPS-3  was  notably  lower  in  our  analyses  in  a  sepsis population, with an AUC of 0.75. Thus, our findings suggest that the performance of SAPS-3 in a sepsis population is lower than in a general ICU population, which is important since sepsis is common in the ICU. 1,2  SAPS-3 also requires extensive clinical information, which limits its use. Another potential mortality prediction model for sepsis patients in the ICU is the SOFA score. The SOFA score has previously been shown to predict hospital mortality  in  ICU  patients  adequately. 20   Like  our  model,  it also consists of six parameters and is thus simpler than SAPS-3. Both the SOFA score and our model include the GCS score and bilirubin levels. However, the SOFA score did not perform well in this study compared to our model and SAPS-3. The SOFA score is not mainly intended for mortality prediction but rather to estimate and monitor the degree of organ dysfunction. One could argue that the SOFA  score  complements  mortality  prediction  tools rather than replaces them. 15

Figure 2. ROC curves and AUC for SAPS-3, SOFA score, and a simple six-parameter model consisting of age, immunosuppression, Glasgow Coma Scale, body temperature, C-reactive protein and bilirubin in predicting 30-day mortality in sepsis patients admitted to the ICU. ROC: receiver operating characteristic; AUC: area under curve; SAPS: Simplified Acute Physiology Score; SOFA: Sequential Organ Failure Assessment; ICU: intensive care unit.

<!-- image -->

We found a simple six-parameter model that was as good as SAPS-3 in the Sepsis-3 population in our large cohort. This model suggests a higher risk of death within 30 days of ICU admission with advanced age, immunosuppression,  low  GCS  score,  low  body  temperature, increased CRP level and increased bilirubin level. It combines measures of systemic inflammation (CRP), immune dysregulation (normo- or hypothermia during sepsis) and