## RESEARCH

## Open Access

<!-- image -->

## Clinical outcomes and prognostic factors of patients with sepsis caused by intra-abdominal infection in the intensive care unit: a post-hoc analysis of a prospective cohort study in Korea

Chan Hee Park 1 , Jeong Woo Lee 1 , Hak Jae Lee 2 , Dong Kyu Oh 3 , Mi Hyeon Park 3 , Chae-Man Lim 3 and Suk-Kyung Hong 2* on behalf of the Korean Sepsis Alliance (KSA) investigators

## Abstract

Background: Sepsis is the most common cause of death in hospitals, and intra-abdominal infection (IAI) accounts for a large portion of the causes of sepsis. We investigated the clinical outcomes and factors influencing mortality of patients with sepsis due to IAI.

Methods: This post-hoc analysis of a prospective cohort study included 2126 patients with sepsis who visited 16 tertiary care hospitals in Korea (September 2019-February 2020). The analysis included 219 patients aged &gt; 19 years who were admitted to intensive care units owing to sepsis caused by IAI.

Results: The incidence of septic shock was 47% and was significantly higher in the non-survivor group (58.7% vs 42.3%, p = 0.028). The overall 28-day mortality was 28.8%. In multivariable logistic regression, after adjusting for age, sex, Charlson Comorbidity Index, and lactic acid, only coagulation dysfunction (odds ratio: 2.78 [1.47-5.23], p = 0.001) was independently associated, and after adjusting for each risk factor, only simplified acute physiology score III (SAPS 3) ( p &lt;  0.001) and continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) ( p &lt;  0.001) were independently associated with higher 28-day mortality.

Conclusions: The SAPS 3 score and acute kidney injury with CRRT were independently associated with increased 28-day mortality. Additional support may be needed in patients with coagulopathy than in those with other organ dysfunctions due to IAI because patients with coagulopathy had worse prognosis.

Keywords: Intensive care unit, Intra-abdominal infection, Mortality rate, Organ dysfunction, Sepsis, Source control

## Introduction

Sepsis is an uncontrolled reaction of the host to infection, which can be potentially life-threatening. Accurate calculation of the global burden of sepsis is difficult. A recent study has reported approximately 48.9 million cases and 11  million  sepsis-related  deaths  in  2017.  This  accounts for nearly 20% of all deaths worldwide, and sepsis is the most common cause of death in hospitals in the United

*Correspondence:  skhong94@amc.seoul.kr

2 Division of Acute Care Surgery, Department of Surgery, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan College of Medicine, 88 Olympic-Ro 43-Gil, Songpa-Gu, Seoul 05505, Republic of Korea

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

<!-- image -->

© The Author(s) 2022. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://  creat  iveco  mmons.  org/  licen  ses/  by/4.  0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://  creat  iveco mmons.  org/  publi  cdoma  in/  zero/1.  0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.

States  [1,  2].  Sepsis  is  a  major  public  health  issue,  and the costs for treating sepsis in hospitals have increased, exceeding  US  $24  billion  per  year  [2,  3].  Likewise,  the incidence of sepsis and the treatment costs in Korea have steadily increased, particularly among older adults [4].

Intra-abdominal infection (IAI) is defined as an inflammatory reaction to bacteria and their toxins in the peritoneum, resulting in a purulent exudate in the peritoneal cavity [5-8]. Among all the causes of sepsis, IAI is reportedly  the  second  most  common  cause,  with  a  relatively high mortality rate of nearly 30.0% [4, 9, 10]. In particular, most sepsis cases in surgical intensive care units (ICUs) are  caused  by  IAI.  Source  control  and  antibiotic  use are  essential  in  the  treatment  of  these  patients.  Various forms of IAIs may exist, including those in the hepatobiliary tract, stomach, small bowel, and colon. In addition, there  are  differences  in  mortality  and  clinical  outcomes according to the type of organ, degree of anatomical disruption, and duration of IAI [5, 7, 9]. Treatment of IAI can be difficult because the spectrum of infection is wide compared with that of other infection causes and source control,  wherein drainage or surgical treatment is often required.

However, studies on the clinical outcomes and impact of  organ  dysfunction  in  patients  with  sepsis  due  to  IAI are limited. Therefore, the primary objective of our study was to investigate the clinical outcomes and the factors affecting the mortality in patients with sepsis due to IAI. The secondary objective was to determine the impact of organ dysfunction on mortality rates.

## Materials and methods

## Study design, setting, and definition

This post-hoc analysis of a prospective cohort study was performed by the Korean Sepsis Alliance (KSA) encompassing  16  tertiary  or  university-affiliated  hospitals  in Korea. The Steering Committee developed the research data collection methods to manage the sepsis data platform,  periodically  reviewed  the  progress  of  each  study, and  supervised  the  overall  research  progress  in  association  with  the  Korea  Disease  Control  and  Prevention  Agency  (KDCA). The data used in this study were screened  from  all  consecutive  patients  who  visited  the participating  hospitals  for  six  months  (September  1, 2019, to February 29, 2020).

This  prospective  cohort  study  analyzed  data  from  the Korean sepsis registry, and this study was already deliberated as a service project by the KDCA. The study was approved by the institutional review boards (IRB) of all participating hospitals, including the IRB of Asan Medical  Center  (approval  number  2018-0675).  Data  were collected  and  analyzed  in  an  ethical  manner  while  protecting the patients' right to privacy. The requirement for informed consent was waived owing to the non-interventional, observational characteristics by the IRB of all participating  hospitals,  including  the  IRB  of  Asan  Medical Center (approval number 2018-0675).

Our study  enrolled  a  total  of  2126  patients  with  sepsis  who were admitted to the participating hospitals for 6  months.  Of  these  patients,  901  were  treated  in  ICUs. Finally, the study included 219 patients who were admitted to the ICU due to sepsis caused by IAI (Fig. 1). Sepsis patients  aged ≥ 19  years  were  included  and  followed  up until death or discharge. As defined by the Clinical Criteria  of  the  Third  International  Consensus  Definition (Sepsis-3), sepsis was defined as a life-threatening organ dysfunction resulting from an uncontrolled host response to infection [11]. Organ dysfunction was included in the definition of sepsis, and the presence or absence of organ dysfunction  was  determined  using  a  Sequential  Organ Failure  Assessment  (SOFA)  score.  In  this  study,  sepsis was diagnosed if the patient met the following two conditions:  (1)  suspicion  or  confirmation of infection and (2) increase in SOFA score by two points or more when an event occurred. The base SOFA score of each organ was assumed to be zero for patients with no known pre-existing organ dysfunction, and patients with a SOFA score of two or higher at the time of the event were enrolled in the  study.  Peritonitis  caused  by  perforation  of  a  hollow viscus,  intra-abdominal  abscess,  biliary  tract  infection, pancreatic  infection,  enteritis,  and  colitis  were  defined as having IAI. The Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) scale is a measurement index created to check performance  status,  determine  appropriate  treatment policy,  and  predict  prognosis  in  cancer  patients.  Using the ECOG scale, it is possible to objectively evaluate the patient's  level  of  functioning  in  terms  of  their  ability  to care for themselves, perform activities of daily living, and their physical ability. It is divided into six scales: (0) fully active  and  no  performance  restrictions;  (1)  strenuous physical activity restricted, fully ambulatory and able to carry out light work; (2) capable of all self-care but unable to carry out any work activities; up and about &gt; 50% of waking hours; (3) capable of only limited self-care and confined to bed or chair &gt; 50% of waking hours; (4) completely  disabled  and  cannot carry out any self-care; and (5) death. Continuous renal replacement therapy (CRRT) refers  to  patients  who  underwent  CRRT  for  the  treatment of acute kidney injury, and excludes patients who underwent  conventional  hemodialysis  as  renal  replacement therapy. In community-acquired sepsis, time zero was  defined  as  the  time  of  an  emergency  room  triage visit.  In-hospital-acquired  sepsis,  time  zero  was  defined as  the  first  time  the  rapid  response  team  recognized the  sepsis.  Source  control  was  defined  as  non-surgical treatments  such  as  percutaneous  drainage,  and  surgical treatment  such  as  debridement  or  laparotomy.  Patients who were treated with antibiotics and received intensive care, without any such procedures, were considered not to have received source control.

<!-- image -->

## Data collection

All  trained  research  coordinators  in  each  participating hospital completed their entry into the shared data platform, and the coordinating hospital evaluated the quality of the data for completeness and logical errors. The data collected  retrospectively  in  each  hospital  were  as  follows: (1) patient characteristics, including age, sex, body mass  index  (BMI),  Charlson  Comorbidity  Index  (CCI), physiological status, medical history, SOFA score, simplified acute physiology score III (SAPS 3), and laboratory data at time zero; (2) clinical results, including the duration from time zero to antibiotic administration, source control implementation, and duration from time zero to source control implementation; (3) infection and microbiological data, including the type of isolated bacteria and fungi, occurrence of bacteremia and multidrug resistance (MDR), and location of infection; and (4) organ dysfunction data, including the type of organ dysfunction results and analysis of the number of organ dysfunctions. Additional data compared with those in previous studies were collected. However, these were not used in our study.

## Statistical analysis

Statistical analysis was conducted by the staff of the coordinating center and by a professor at the Department of Clinical  Epidemiology  and  Biostatistics,  Asan  Medical Center, who did not participate in data collection.

Data  are  presented  as  numbers  (percentages)  or  as mean ± standard deviation. The characteristics and clinical  data  of  the  survivor  and  non-survivor  groups  were compared using the chi-square test or Fisher's exact test (for categorical variables) and Student's t-test (for continuous variables). Risk factors associated with 28-day mortality  were analyzed by univariate and then multivariate logistic  regression,  and  the  degree  of  association  with 28-day mortality was presented as an independent factor by means of odds ratios (ORs) with their corresponding 95% confidence intervals. Infection profile data were analyzed  using  the  number  (percentage)  or  mean ± standard  deviation.  The  microbiological  data  were  described by  total  numbers  and  proportions,  which  showed  the distribution of bacteria and fungi in patients with sepsis due to IAI. Multivariate logistic  regression  analysis  was used to estimate the association between organ dysfunction and 28-day mortality, with unadjusted and adjusted evaluations.  We  adjusted  28-day  mortality  for  age,  sex, CCI, and lactic  acid  levels.  We  used  OR  to  present  the impact  of  organ  dysfunction  on  28-day  mortality  and analyzed the impact of the number of organ dysfunctions on 28-day mortality using ORs in the logistic regression analysis. Also, the multiple logistic regression by stepwise selection was used to explain the 28-day mortality using independent  variables.  The  logistic  regression  performance is denoted by c-statistics and Hosmer-Lemeshow tests. Differences were considered statistically significant at P &lt; 0.05. All analyses were conducted using SPSS software (version 25.0; IBM Corp., Armonk, NY, USA).

Table 1 Patient characteristics and clinical data

|                                                       | All patients (n = 219)   | Survivors (n = 156)   | Non-survivors (n = 63)   | P-value   |
|-------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------|-----------------------|--------------------------|-----------|
| Age (years), mean ( ± SD)                             | 69.4 ± 13.1              | 69.1 ± 13.0           | 70.2 ± 13.5              | 0.886     |
| Sex, n (%)                                            |                          |                       |                          | 0.538     |
| Male                                                  | 118 (53.9)               | 82 (52.6)             | 36 (57.1)                |           |
| BMI (kg/m 2 ), mean ( ± SD)                           | 23.0 ± 4.2               | 22.8 ± 3.9            | 23.6 ± 4.8               | 0.091     |
| Charlson comorbidity index, mean ( ± SD)              | 5.3 ± 2.6                | 5.1 ± 2.3             | 5.9 ± 3.0                | 0.011     |
| Initial ECOG score, n (%)                             |                          |                       |                          | 0.075     |
| 0                                                     | 52 (23.7)                | 39 (25.0)             | 13 (20.6)                |           |
| 1                                                     | 59 (26.9)                | 46 (29.5)             | 13 (20.6)                |           |
| 2                                                     | 47 (21.5)                | 31 (19.9)             | 16 (25.4)                |           |
| 3                                                     | 38 (17.4)                | 21 (13.5)             | 17 (27.0)                |           |
| 4                                                     | 23 (10.5)                | 19 (12.2)             | 4 (6.3)                  |           |
| Septic shock, n (%)                                   | 103 (47.0)               | 66 (42.3)             | 37 (58.7)                | 0.028     |
| Initial lactate level (mmol/L), mean ( ± SD)          | 5.3 ± 4.0                | 4.5 ± 3.1             | 7.2 ± 5.0                | <0.001    |
| Initial SOFA score, mean ( ± SD)                      | 9.5 ± 4.0                | 8.4 ± 3.1             | 12.2 ± 4.6               | <0.001    |
| SAPS 3 score, mean ( ± SD)                            | 73.9 ± 16.4              | 70.1 ± 14.4           | 83.4 ± 17.3              | 0.098     |
| CRRT, n (%)                                           | 68 (31.1)                | 25 (16.0)             | 43 (68.3)                | <0.001    |
| Steroid use, n (%)                                    | 64 (29.2)                | 42 (26.9)             | 22 (34.9)                | 0.239     |
| Initial laboratory results                            |                          |                       |                          |           |
| Platelet count (10 3 /uL)                             | 170.7 ± 125.6            | 184.5 ± 130.0         | 136 ± 107.2              | 0.299     |
| Creatinine level (mg/dL)                              | 2.1 ± 1.9                | 1.96 ± 2.0            | 2.40 ± 1.5               | 0.796     |
| Total bilirubin level (mg/dL)                         | 3.0 ± 5.1                | 2.2 ± 2.8             | 4.9 ± 8.2                | <0.001    |
| CRP level (mg/dL)                                     | 14.2 ± 10.3              | 14.3 ± 9.5            | 14.0 ± 12.2              | 0.027     |
| Procalcitonin level (ng/ml)                           | 37.0 ± 67.2              | 31.7 ± 50.0           | 50.6 ± 97.9              | 0.006     |
| BNP level (pg/mL)                                     | 699.0 ± 1207.3           | 458.6 ± 886.0         | 1312.0 ± 1659.0          | <0.001    |
| Time zero to time of antibiotics administration (min) | 184.7 ± 303.0            | 171.4 ± 238.8         | 217.5 ± 422.8            | 0.495     |
| Source control, n (%)                                 | 90 (41.1)                | 73 (46.8)             | 17 (27.0)                | 0.007     |
| Source control time (h)                               | 22.1 ± 37.0              | 22.9 ± 39.4           | 18.5 ± 24.9              | 0.489     |
| Number of organ dysfunction, mean ( ± SD)             | 1.7 ± 1.3                | 1.4 ± 1.21            | 2.3 ± 1.4                | 0.019     |

Data are shown as mean ± standard deviation or number (percentage)

SD standard deviation, BMI body mass index, ECOG Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group, SOFA Sequential Organ Failure Assessment, SAPS 3 simplified acute physiology score III, CRRT continuous renal replacement therapy, CRP C-reactive protein, BNP brain natriuretic peptide

## Results

## Patient characteristics and clinical data

During  the  6-month  study  period,  total  2126  patients were admitted owing to sepsis at the participating hospitals;  219  (10.3%)  were  admitted  to  the  ICU  owing  to sepsis caused by IAI according to collected data review. The  28-day  mortality  rate  of  all  enrolled  patients  with sepsis  was  28.1%  (n = 598/2126).  Among these patients, the mortality rate was 28.8% (n = 63/219) for sepsis due to IAI in the ICU.

Patient characteristics and clinical data at the time of sepsis  diagnosis  are  summarized  in  Table  1.  The  mean age of the patients was 69.4 ± 13.1 years, and 53.9% were men. The mean BMI was 23.0 ± 4.2 kg/m 2 ; no significant difference  was  noted  in  BMI  between  the  survivor  and non-survivor groups. The mean CCI in the non-survivor