## RESEARCH

## Open Access

## Risk factor analysis and nomogram for predicting in-hospital mortality in ICU patients with sepsis and lung infection

<!-- image -->

Yinlong Ren 1 , Luming Zhang 1,2 , Fengshuo Xu 2,3 , Didi Han 2,3 , Shuai Zheng 2,4 , Feng Zhang 1 , Longzhu Li 1 , Zichen Wang 5 , Jun Lyu 2* and Haiyan Yin 1*

## Abstract

Background: Lung infection is a common cause of sepsis, and patients with sepsis and lung infection are more ill and have a higher mortality rate than sepsis patients without lung infection. We constructed a nomogram prediction model to accurately evaluate the prognosis of and provide treatment advice for patients with sepsis and lung infection.

Methods: Data were retrospectively extracted from the Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care (MIMIC-III) opensource clinical database. The definition of Sepsis 3.0 [10] was used, which includes patients with life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by an uncontrolled host response to infection, and SOFA score ≥ 2. The nomogram prediction model was constructed from the training set using logistic regression analysis, and was then internally validated and underwent sensitivity analysis.

Results: The risk factors of age, lactate, temperature, oxygenation index, BUN, lactate, Glasgow Coma Score (GCS), liver disease, cancer, organ transplantation, Troponin T(TnT), neutrophil-to-lymphocyte ratio (NLR), and CRRT, MV, and vasopressor use were included in the nomogram. We compared our nomogram with the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score and Simplified Acute Physiology Score II (SAPSII), the nomogram had better discrimination ability, with areas under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.743 (95% C.I.: 0.713-0.773) and 0.746 (95% C.I.: 0.699-0.790) in the training and validation sets, respectively. The calibration plot indicated that the nomogram was adequate for predicting the in-hospital mortality risk in both sets. The decision-curve analysis (DCA) of the nomogram revealed that it provided net benefits for clinical use over using the SOFA score and SAPSII in both sets.

Conclusion: Our new nomogram is a convenient tool for accurate predictions of in-hospital mortality among ICU patients with sepsis and lung infection. Treatment strategies that improve the factors considered relevant in the model could increase in-hospital survival for these ICU patients.

Keywords: Sepsis, Nomogram, Lung infection

*Correspondence:  lyujun2020@jnu.edu.cn; yinhaiyan1867@126.com

1 Intensive Care Unit, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University,

Guangzhou 510630, Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China

2 Department of Clinical Research, The First Affiliated Hospital of Jinan University, Guangzhou 510630, Guangdong Province, People's Republic of China

Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

<!-- image -->

## Background

Sepsis is  particularly  common in ICUs, and it is one of the  main  causes  of  disability  and  death  in  severely  ill patients. At least 3 million patients worldwide suffer from sepsis annually, with mortality rates as high as 30-50%, causing serious damage to both their families and society as a whole [1-3]. Sepsis usually has rapid onset, rapidly

© The Author(s) 2021. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://  creat  iveco  mmons.  org/  licen  ses/  by/4.  0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://  creat  iveco mmons.  org/  publi  cdoma  in/  zero/1.  0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.

deteriorating  progress,  affects  multiple  organs,  and  is difficult to reverse, meaning that when a patient is diagnosed with sepsis, it should be treated immediately.

Sepsis has a complicated source and dangerous condition.  It  can  be  caused  by  various  factors  and  affects  the function of multiple organs. Lung infection is one of the main causes of sepsis [4, 5], and more than 40% of sepsis patients have lung infections. Studies have indicated that patients with sepsis and lung infection are more ill and have a higher mortality rate [6, 7]. If patients with sepsis and lung infection  can  be  assessed  early,  and  appropriate treatment strategies can be applied in time, mortality rates can be effectively reduced [8]. However, there is no effective scale for evaluating the prognosis and condition of sepsis patients with lung infection, leading to precise treatment delay and extra plague for patients. Although the  Sequential  Organ  Failure  Assessment  (SOFA)  score and  Acute  Physiology  and  Chronic  Health  Evaluation II  (APACHEII) scores are somewhat useful in assessing the condition of patients, the scores mainly evaluate the physiological functions of organs and lack pertinence and sensitivity in evaluating clinical practices and prognoses of  patients  with  sepsis  and  lung  infection  and  are  not effective in guiding the treatment of these patients during the clinical process. As there is currently no effective evaluation scale for predicting the in-hospital outcomes of patients with sepsis and lung infection, our study analyzed  the  risk  factors  of  in-hospital  mortality  for  sepsis patients  with  lung  infection  from  the  Medical  Information Mart for Intensive Care (MIMIC-III) database, constructed  a  nomogram  prediction  model,  and  compared it  with the SOFA score and Simplified Acute Physiology Score II (SAPSII) systems to accurately evaluate patient conditions, predict the prognostic outcome, and provide advice for the treatment of patients with sepsis and lung infection.

## Data and method

## Database

Research data were extracted from the MIMIC-III database, which includes ICU patients who visited the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center [8, 9]. Structured Query Language  (SQL)  with  Navicat  Premium  was  used  to search for and extract data, and R software was used for further processing of the data. The MIMIC-III database (version  1.4, https://  mimic.  physi  onet.  org/) is free for public  use  and  contains  information  required  for  clinical  research,  such  as  basic  demographic  characteristics, examination  results,  disease  diagnoses,  and  treatment methods  received.  The  in-hospital  and  postdischarge outcomes of  patients  are  also  included  in  the  database. After  obtaining  access  to  the  MIMIC-III  database  and receiving  approval  from  the  institutional  review  boards of  both  Beth  Israel  Deaconess  Medical  Center  (Boston, MA, USA) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Cambridge, MA, USA), we were free to extract data for  our  study.  Since  the  identity  and  private  messages of  all  patients  has  been  absolutely  concealed  within  the database,  our  study  does  not  violate  the  privacy  of  the patients.

## Patient admission and data extraction

The following inclusion criteria were applied: (1) entering the ICU for the first time, (2) diagnosed with sepsis and lung infection, and (3) aged 18-80 years. The exclusion criteria  were  (1)  SOFA  score &lt; 2  and  (2)  stay  of  shorter than 24 h in the ICU.

The  definition  of  Sepsis  3.0  [10]  was  used,  which includes patients with life-threatening organ dysfunction caused  by  an  uncontrolled  host  response  to  infection, and SOFA score ≥ 2. Lung infection diagnosis was determined by the ninth edition of the International Classification of Diseases codes for the MIMIC-III patient data.

Data  were  extracted  from  the  MIMIC-III  database using SQL with Navicat Premium. The sampling process is  presented  in  Fig.  1.  We  extracted  patients  diagnosed sepsis  and  pneumonia(including  all  pathogen  infection like  bacteria,  virus  and  fungus)  according  to  the  ICD9,and then extracted ID, SOFA score, and basic characteristics  of  target  patients  from  MIMIC-III  data  tables, and  unsuitable  patients  (&lt; 18  or ≥ 80  years  old,  SOFA score &lt; 2,  and  ICU  stay  of  &lt; 24  h)  were  excluded.  The extracted variable items were (1) baseline characteristics and vital signs including mean arterial pressure (MAP), heart  rate,  respiratory  rate,  SpO2,  and  temperature,  (2) laboratory test and blood culture results, (3) SOFA score, SAPSII, and GCS to assess organ function, (4) complications  including  congestive  heart  failure(CHF),  chronic obstructive pulmonary disease(COPD), renal failure, liver disease,  neurological  disease,  cancer,  diabetes,  AIDS, organ transplantation, and pneumomycosis, and (5) the use of vasopressor and interventions such as CVP, CRRT, MV, and fiberscopy. Vital signs and laboratory data from blood  examinations,  basic  blood  biochemical  indexes, and arterial blood gas were collected over the first 24 h of the ICU stay. If a variable was recorded more than once, the value representing the most severe illness was used. We  collected  discharge  outcome  data  of  all  patients  as the dependent variable of this observational study.

## Data management and statistical analysis

We used multiple  imputation  method  to  fill  in  missing data  through  R  software  package  of  'lattice' ,  '  MASS' , 'nnet'  and  'mice' ,  variables  with  a  missing  data  rate  of more than 20% were deleted [11]. After confirming the data set, the continuous variables of blood glucose, MAP, pH,  heart  rate,  and  body  temperature  were  converted into  graded  categorical  variables  (the  concrete  transformations are presented in Table 1), mean ± standard deviation  or  median  (interquartile  range)  values  described continuous variables, and categorical variables were presented as percentages.

<!-- image -->

We then conducted logistic regression analysis in training  set  to  determine  independent  variables  relating  to patient  in-hospital  mortality,  selected  related  variables by  using  multivariate  logistic  regression  analysis  on  the independent variables to calculate estimated odds ratios (ORs) and 95% confidence intervals (CIs), and set p &lt;  0.1 as the threshold for excluding nonsignificant factors. The development  of  the  nomogram  began  with  randomly dividing samples without replacement into a training set and a validation set at a ratio of 7:3. An original nomogram for predicting in-hospital mortality of patients with sepsis and lung infection was constructed using the training set. Parsimony was a goal in the modeling, the most effective model should achieve the study aim and contain as few variables as possible [12], and considering clinical practice, GCS score and oxygenation index were included in the nomogram to complete the optimized nomogram. Areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves (AUROCs) were calculated to evaluate the performance of the nomogram [13], and we compared the AUROC of nomogram with those of SOFA score and SAPSII in both the  training  and  validation  set  through  Delong's  test. The  integrated  discrimination  improvement  (IDI)  and net  reclassification  index  (NRI)  were  used  to  compare discrimination slopes.  The  Hosmer-Lemeshow test and calibration plots were used to evaluate the calibration of the model [14]. Finally, to evaluate the net benefits, decision-curve analysis (DCA) was applied to the nomogram, SOFA  score,  and  SAPSII  models,  and  then  these  were compared under different  threshold  probabilities  in  the training and validation sets.

R software (version 3.6.1,  R  Foundation  for  Statistical Computing, Vienna, Austria) was used for all statistical analyses. To amend incomplete data, the multiple imputation method was applied during the statistical analysis process. The statistically significant threshold was a twosided p value of &lt; 0.05. TRIPOD (transparent reporting of a multivariate prediction model for individual prognosis

Table 1 Demographic and clinical characteristics of patients

|                            | Survived to dischargeN = 1191   |                         | Died in hospitalN = 485   | P value   |
|----------------------------|---------------------------------|-------------------------|---------------------------|-----------|
| Demographics               |                                 |                         |                           |           |
| Age (years)                |                                 | 58.84 ± 13.95           | 62.13 ± 12.60             | <0.001*   |
| Gender (%)                 |                                 |                         |                           |           |
| Male                       |                                 | 724 (60.8)              | 283 (58.4)                | 0.385     |
| Vital signs                |                                 |                         |                           |           |
| Heart Rate (times/min, %)  | 0 (60-100)                      | 358 (30.1)              | 127 (26.2)                |           |
|                            | 1 (101-120)                     | 418 (35.1)              | 146 (30.1)                | 0.003*    |
|                            | 2 (<60or 121-140)               | 276 (23.2)              | 134 (27.6)                |           |
|                            | 3 (140-160)                     | 118 ( 9.9)              | 58 (12.0)                 |           |
|                            | 4 (>160)                        | 21 (1.8)                | 20 (4.1)                  |           |
| MBP (mmhg, %)              | 0 (65-110)                      | 226 (19.0)              | 81 (16.7)                 | 0.191     |
|                            | 1 (50-64 or 111-130)            | 618 (51.9)              | 242 (49.9)                |           |
|                            | 2 (<50 or>160)                  | 347 (29.1)              | 162 (33.4)                |           |
| Breath rate (times/min, %) | 0 (12-24)                       | 254 (21.3)              | 96 (19.8)                 | 0.525     |
|                            | 1 (10-11 or 25-34)              | 641 (53.8)              | 252 (52.0)                |           |
|                            | 2 (35-49)                       | 272 (22.8)              | 127 (26.2)                |           |
|                            | 3 (<6 or>49)                    | 24 (2.0)                | 10 (2.1)                  |           |
| T ( ℃ , %)                 | 0 (36-37.3)                     | 333 (28.0)              | 184 (37.9)                | <0.001*   |
|                            | 1 (37.3-38.2 or 35.001-35.9)    | 399 (33.5)              | 177 (36.5)                |           |
|                            | 2 (38.201-39.1or 34.001-35)     | 299 (25.1)              | 81 (16.7)                 |           |
|                            | 3 (39.101-40 or<34)             | 135 (11.3)              | 32 (6.6)                  |           |
|                            | 4(>40)                          | 25 (2.1)                | 11 (2.3)                  |           |
| SpO2                       |                                 | 92.00 [89.00, 95.00]    | 91.00 [88.00, 94.00]      | <0.001*   |
| Gcs                        |                                 | 15.00 [14.00, 15.00]    | 15.00 [12.00, 15.00]      | 0.002*    |
| Sofa                       |                                 | 6.00 [4.00, 9.00]       | 8.00 [5.00, 11.00]        | <0.001*   |
| SAPSII                     |                                 | 40.00 [31.00, 49.00]    | 49.00 [41.00, 59.00]      | <0.001*   |
| Library tests              |                                 |                         |                           |           |
| Glucose (mmol/L, %)        | 0 (3.9-7.8)                     | 380 (31.9)              | 138 (28.5)                | 0.5       |
|                            | 1 (7.8-11.1)                    | 390 (32.7)              | 167 (34.4)                |           |
|                            | 2 (11.2-16.7 or 1.6-3.8)        | 276 (23.2)              | 123 (25.4)                |           |
|                            | 3 (>16.7 or<1.6)                | 145 (12.2)              | 57 (11.8)                 |           |
| ALBUMIN (g/dl)             |                                 | 2.82 ± 0.66             | 2.66 ± 0.68               | <0.001*   |
| BILIRUBIN (mg/dl)          |                                 | 0.70 [0.40, 1.30]       | 0.90 [0.50, 2.70]         | <0.001*   |
| BUN (mg/dl)                |                                 | 29.00 [18.00, 47.00]    | 37.00 [24.00, 58.00]      | <0.001*   |
| CREATININE (mg/dl)         |                                 | 1.40 [0.90, 2.40]       | 1.60 [1.10, 2.80]         | <0.001*   |
| WBC (k/ul)                 |                                 | 13.80 [9.60, 19.90]     | 14.50 [8.30, 20.90]       | 0.836     |
| HEMOGLOBIN (g/dl)          |                                 | 9.62 ± 1.90             | 9.32 ± 1.90               | 0.001*    |
| PLATELET (k/ul)            |                                 | 180.00 [112.00, 264.00] | 144.00 [60.00, 247.00]    | <0.001*   |
| APTT(s)                    |                                 | 34.50 [29.45, 45.70]    | 37.80 [30.80, 55.00]      | <0.001*   |
| INR                        |                                 | 1.40 [1.20, 1.80]       | 1.60 [1.30, 2.40]         | <0.001*   |
| PT(s)                      |                                 | 15.20 [13.70, 18.00]    | 16.40 [14.20, 21.20]      | <0.001*   |
| TnT (ug/L)                 |                                 | 0.08 [0.03, 0.27]       | 0.10 [0.04, 0.37]         | <0.001*   |
| NLR                        |                                 | 8.57 [6.24, 9.94]       | 9.38 [7.36, 35.52]        | <0.001*   |
| Blood culture (%)          |                                 | 413 (34.7)              | 193 (39.8)                | 0.055     |
| Blood gas analysis         |                                 |                         |                           |           |
| PH (%)                     | 0 (7.35-7.45)                   | 426 (35.8)              | 139 (28.7)                | 0.011*    |
|                            | 1 (7.25-7.34 or 7.46-7.55)      | 434 (36.4)              | 175 (36.1)                |           |
|                            | 2 (7.15-7.24 or 7.56-7.65)      | 220 (18.5)              | 105 (21.6)                |           |
|                            | 3 (7.05-7.14)                   | 82 ( 6.9)               | 47 ( 9.7)                 |           |