## Risk factors for death in patients with sepsis admitted to an obstetric intensive care unit

## A cohort study

Ana Maria Coêlho Holanda, MD, MSc a, ∗ , Melania Maria Ramos de Amorim, MD, PhD a , Sammyle Maria Barros Bezerra, MD b , Larissa Miranda Silva Aschoff, MD a , Leila Katz, MD, PhD a

## Abstract

Improving understanding of the prognostic factors associated with death resulting from sepsis in obstetric patients is essential to allow management to be optimized. This retrospective cohort study aimed to determine the risk factors for death in patients with sepsis admitted to the obstetric intensive care unit of a tertiary teaching hospital in northeastern Brazil between April 2012 and April 2016.

The clinical, obstetric, and laboratory data of the sepsis patients, as well as data on their fi nal outcome, were collected. A signi fi cance level of 5% was adopted. Risk factors for death in patients with sepsis were evaluated in a multivariate analysis.

During the period analyzed, 155 patients with sepsis were identi fi ed and included in the study, representing 5.2% of all obstetric intensive care unit (ICU) admissions. Of these, 14.2% (n = 22) died. The risk factors for death were septic shock at the time of hospitalization (relative risk [RR] = 3.45; 95% con fi dence interval [CI]: 1.64 -7.25), need for vasopressors during hospitalization (RR = 17.32; 95% CI: 4.20 -71.36), lactate levels &gt; 2mmol/L at the time of diagnosis (RR = 4.60; 95% CI: 1.05 -20.07), and sequential organ failure assessment score &gt; 2 at the time of diagnosis (RR = 5.97; 95% CI: 1.82 -19.94). Following multiple logistic regression analysis, only the need for vasopressors during hospitalization remained as a risk factor associated with death (odds ratio [OR] = 26.38; 95% CI: 5.87 -118.51).

The need for vasopressors during hospitalization is associated with death in obstetric patients with sepsis.

Abbreviations: CI = con fi dence interval, HIV = human immunode fi ciency virus, ICU = intensive care unit, IMIP = Instituto de Medicina Integral Prof. Fernando Figueira, IQR = interquartile range, OR = odds ratio, RR = relative risk, SD = standard deviation, SOFA score = sequential organ failure assessment score.

Keywords: mortality, pregnancy, sepsis

## Editor: Daryle Wane.

Ethical aspects: The project was approved by IMIP ' s internal review board (CAAE 49815615.9.0000.5201). The need for informed consent was waived based on the retrospective nature of the study.

Funding: None.

The authors have no con fl icts of interest to disclose.

The datasets generated during and/or analyzed during the current study are available from the corresponding author on reasonable request.

a Instituto de Medicina Integral Prof. Fernando Figueira (IMIP), b Postgraduate Training in Intensive Care Medicine at Redentor/AMIB University Center, Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil.

∗ Correspondence: Ana Maria Coêlho Holanda, Avenida Ininga, 284/901, Joquei. 64048110, Teresina, Piauí, Brazil. e-mail: (ch.anamaria@hotmail.com)

Copyright © 2020 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial License 4.0 (CCBY-NC), where it is permissible to download, share, remix, transform, and buildup the work provided it is properly cited. The work cannot be used commercially without permission from the journal.

How to cite this article: Holanda AM, Amorim MM, Bezerra SM, Aschoff LM, Katz L. Risk factors for death in patients with sepsis admitted to an obstetric intensive care unit: a cohort study. Medicine 2020;99:50(e23566).

Received: 7 January 2020 / Received in fi nal form: 28 August 2020 / Accepted: 3 November 2020

http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000023566

## 1. Introduction

Sepsis, de fi ned as life-threatening organ dysfunction caused by deregulated host response to infection, is currently considered one of the major causes of morbidity and mortality in the world. [1] According to the World Health Organization, it is the third leading cause of direct maternal death worldwide. In Latin America and the Caribbean, it corresponds to 8.3% of all deaths. [2]

In the United Kingdom, the incidence of severe sepsis in 2011 to 2012 was 0.47 per 10,000 live births. Of these, 20% went on to develop septic shock. [3] A study conducted in 2015 in the United States of America (USA) reported an incidence of maternal sepsis of 29.4 per 100,000 births, with a mortality rate of 4.4 per 100 live births. [4]

Infection is the third leading cause of direct maternal death in Brazil, corresponding to 5.2% of cases in 2016 (provisional data up to May 2017). [5] A Brazilian study, carried out in the city of Recife in 2006, reported that infection accounted for 5% of the admissions to an obstetric intensive care unit (ICU). [6]

Several studies have identi fi ed risk factors associated with a diagnosis of sepsis in the obstetric population; however, few have addressed how these patients should be treated and the factors associated with death. [7,8] A population-based cohort study conducted in the USA showed that the risk of maternal death was higher in patients with human immunode fi ciency virus (HIV) infection. The risk of mortality was also high in patients with a history of cancer, chronic liver disease, and drug use, those without health insurance, patients with multiple organ failure, and those requiring mechanical ventilation or hemodialysis. [9] Another study conducted in the United Kingdom identi fi ed the presence of comorbidities, multiparity, absence of antibiotic use, and unemployment as being the principal factors associated with death. [7,9]

<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

Despite its importance, few studies have been conducted on obstetric patients with sepsis, with most reports originating from the USA and Europe. In view of the aforementioned factors, it is essential to gain greater understanding regarding the factors associated with death resulting from sepsis in obstetric patients in order to identify prognostic factors and optimize management.

Given the scarcity of studies conducted for this purpose and in view of the high rate of sepsis and mortality in this geographical region, the present study was carried out to determine the factors related to death in patients with sepsis admitted to an obstetric ICU.

## 2. Methods

This study was conducted in the maternity unit of the Instituto de Medicina Integral Prof. Fernando Figueira (IMIP), in the city of Recife in northeastern Brazil. IMIP is a tertiary hospital, equipped with the only obstetric ICU in the state. An average of 6000 deliveries take place in the hospital annually, with the majority being high-risk patients. All patients receive care within Brazil ' s public health system.

This was a retrospective cohort study that included all patients admitted to the obstetric ICU between August 2012 and April 2016 whose discharge diagnosis was recorded as ' sepsis ' in the ICU ' s discharge database. The records were reviewed to con fi rm diagnosis according to the criteria established at the 2001 Sepsis De fi nitions Conference (Sepsis-2). [10] Cases in which the diagnosis of sepsis could not be con fi rmed following the review of the medical records were excluded from the study, including cases for which the relevant records had been misplaced and records with insuf fi cient data to permit the analysis to be performed.

After the fi rst 50 patients had been selected, sample size was calculated using OpenEpi, version 3.01. (www.OpenEpi.com) Considering a mortality risk of 36% for patients admitted with septic shock compared with 14% for those admitted without septic shock, a total of 122 patients would be required to demonstrate statistically signi fi cant differences between the 2 groups, for a power of 80% and a 95% con fi dence level. The sample was increased by 20% to compensate for any possible losses or exclusions, resulting in a total of 147 patients. Indeed, 166 patients with a diagnosis of sepsis were found in the obstetric ICU database, hence this was the number of medical records considered for inclusion.

Clinical, epidemiological, and laboratory data, as well as data regarding outcome, were extracted retrospectively from charts and collected using a speci fi c standardized form. The dependent variable was maternal death. The independent variables consisted of: maternal age, parity, immediate origin (home or transfer from another hospital), origin (metropolitan region or another region within the state), type of delivery, comorbidities (hypertension, diabetes, chronic kidney disease, chronic liver disease, heart disease, lupus erythematosus, HIV infection, sickle cell disease, and others), obstetric complications (gestational diabetes, preterm labor, premature rupture of membranes, hemorrhage, and others), lifestyle (smoking, alcoholism, and use of illicit drugs), sepsis at admission (according to the criteria established at the 2001 International Sepsis De fi nitions Conference), [10] need for vasopressors at hospital admission, site of infection, sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score at the time of sepsis diagnosis, obtained by evaluating clinical and laboratory criteria that enable organ systems to be monitored, [1] serum lactate at the time of sepsis diagnosis (veri fi ed from an arterial blood gas analysis and considered high if &gt; 2mmol/L, which is indicative of tissue hypoxia, in accordance with the new criteria of sepsis implemented in 2016 and known as ' Sepsis3 ' ), [1] the time of initiation of antibiotic therapy (administration of antibiotics within an hour of diagnosis of sepsis, which included those patients who were already receiving antibiotics prior to diagnosis, or over an hour after diagnosis), adequate venous hydration (either achieved by fl uid replacement with crystalloids, at least 30mL/kg in 3hours, when signs of hypoperfusion were present, or when the patient had maintained normal hydration, thus requiring no intervention), [11] and need for vasopressors during hospitalization (for all patients at admission and/or during hospitalization for whom the use of vasopressors was indicated).

Statistical analysis was performed using Epi Info, version 3.5.1 (Atlanta, GA). Frequency distribution measures with 95% con fi dence intervals (95% CI) were calculated for the categorical variables. Quantitative values were presented as means and standard deviations (SD). Contingency tables were then prepared to determine the association between the independent variables (predictive factors) and death, and relative risk (RR) and 95% CI were calculated. A signi fi cance level of 5% was adopted. All P -values were 2-tailed. A standard risk of 1.0 was assigned to the reference category.

Subsequently, a hierarchical logistic regression analysis was performed. Brie fl y, the variables were divided into blocks according to their proximity to the outcome. In each block, variables that remained associated with the result at a signi fi cance level of 20% were selected and reanalyzed down to the variables that remained associated with the result at a signi fi cance level of 5%. The resulting variables from each block were then evaluated in a new regression analysis where the variables that remained signi fi cantly associated with the result at a 5% signi fi cance level were selected to calculate the adjusted mortality risk.

IMIP ' s internal review board approved the study protocol (CAAE 49815615.9.0000.5201). The need for informed consent was waived based on the retrospective nature of the study.

## 3. Results

Of all the patients admitted to the obstetric ICU between April 2012 and April 2016 (n = 3004), 166 were diagnosed with sepsis at some time during hospitalization. Of these, 3 were excluded because a review of the data failed to con fi rm their diagnosis of sepsis. Three incomplete medical records were excluded so as not to hamper analysis and in 5 cases the relevant medical records were missing. The remaining 155 patients, representing 5.1% of all admissions to the ICU, were included in the analysis.

Twenty-two of the patients who developed sepsis died (14.2%) (Fig. 1). The mean age of the patients who died was 27.1 years (SD = 6.8), signi fi cantly higher than the mean age of those who survived (23.6 years, SD = 6.6) ( P = .02). In the bivariate analysis, however, when the extremes of age ( &lt; 20 years or ≥ 35years) were analyzed, no association was found between age and a risk of death. Furthermore, the distal variables parity, schooling, and origin were not associated with a risk of death (Table 1). Of the intermediate variables, in the bivariate analysis only urinary Table 1

Figure 1. Flowchart showing the recruitment of patients.

<!-- image -->

## Distal factors associated with death in obstetric patients with sepsis.

|                                                                                                            | Death   | Death   |   Death | Death   |      |             |          |
|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|------|-------------|----------|
| Characteristics                                                                                            | Yes     | Yes     |         |         | RR   | 95% CI      | P -value |
| Age (Mean/SD)                                                                                              | 27.1    | 6.8     |    23.6 | 6.6     | -    | -           | .02      |
| Age < 20 years (n/%)                                                                                       | 3       | 13.6    |      40 | 30.1    | 0.41 | 0.12 - 1.31 | .08 ∗ ∗  |
| Age > 35 years (n/%)                                                                                       | 2       | 9.1     |       9 | 6.8     | 1.30 | 0.35 - 4.89 | .48      |
| Number of pregnancies (Median/IQR)                                                                         | 2       | 1 - 3   |       2 | 1 - 3   | -    | -           | .49      |
| Parity (Median/IQR)                                                                                        | 1       | 1 - 2   |       0 | 1 - 2   | -    | -           | .12      |
| Nulliparous (n/%)                                                                                          | 5       | 23.8    |      51 | 39.8    | 0.51 | 0.20 - 1.33 | .16      |
| Multiparous (n/%)                                                                                          | 5       | 23.8    |      17 | 13.3    | 1.80 | 0.73 - 4.42 | .20      |
| Schooling < 8 years (n/%)                                                                                  | 2       | 9.1     |      32 | 24.1    | 0.35 | 0.08 - 1.44 | .09 ∗    |
| Resident of a city in Pernambuco other than the state capital or resident of another Brazilian state (n/%) | 10      | 45.5    |      53 | 39.8    | 1.21 | 0.56 - 2.64 | .62      |

Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil, 2018.

CI = con fi dence interval, IQR = interquartile range, RR = relative risk, SD = standard deviation.

∗ Fisher exact test.

infection was identi fi ed as a protective factor against death in patients with sepsis (RR = 0.26, 95% CI = 0.08 -0.85, P = .009) (Table 2). Of the patients who died, 45.5% had at least one obstetric complication (Table 2). At least one comorbidity was observed in 59.3% of all patients and in 27.3% of those who died (Table 2).

Table 2

## Intermediate factors associated with death in obstetric patients with sepsis.

|                                                    | Death (n/%)   | Death (n/%)   | Death (n/%)   | Death (n/%)   |      |              |            |
|----------------------------------------------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|---------------|------|--------------|------------|
| Characteristics                                    | Yes (n = 22)  | Yes (n = 22)  | No (n = 133)  | No (n = 133)  | RR   | 95% CI       | P -value   |
| Transferred from another hospital                  | 16            | 72.4          | 81            | 60.9          | 1.59 | 0.66 - 3.84  | .28        |
| Pregnant at the time of sepsis ∗                   | 11            | 50.0          | 92            | 69.2          | 0.50 | 0.23 - 1.08  | .07        |
| Caesarean section                                  | 6             | 30.0          | 41            | 54.7          | 0.43 | 0.18 - 1.04  | .050       |
| Obstetric complications                            | 10            | 45.5          | 50            | 37.6          | 1.31 | 0.60 - 2.86  | .48        |
| Comorbidities                                      | 6             | 27.3          | 32            | 24.1          | 1.15 | 0.48 - 2.73  | .75        |
| Lifestyle factors (smoking + use of illicit drugs) | 1             | 4.5           | 3             | 2.3           | 1.79 | 0.31 - 10.27 | .46 ∗∗     |
| Respiratory infection                              | 7             | 31.8          | 32            | 24.1          | 1.38 | 0.61 - 3.15  | .43        |
| Uterine infection                                  | 8             | 36.4          | 40            | 30.1          | 1.27 | 0.57 - 2.83  | .55        |
| Urinary infection                                  | 3             | 13.6          | 55            | 41.4          | 0.26 | 0.08 - 0.85  | .009 ∗∗ ∗∗ |
| Other infections                                   | 4             | 18.2          | 14            | 10.5          | 1.69 | 0.64 - 4.44  | .23        |

Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil, 2018. CI = con fi dence interval, RR = relative risk.

∗∗ Fisher exact test.

∗ Analysis performed for the 95 patients who had the pregnancy interrupted shortly before admission or during hospitalization for sepsis. Forty- fi ve women were discharged from hospital still pregnant, following an episode of sepsis.

Antibiotic therapy was initiated within an hour of the diagnosis of sepsis in 45.6% of the cases, although 48% were already receiving antibiotics even before the diagnosis of sepsis (data not shown in table). Of the patients who died, there was a delay in the initiation of antibiotic therapy (begun over an hour after diagnosis) in 59.1% of cases (Table 3). The mean lactate level at diagnosis in the patients who survived was 2.5mmol/L (SD = 2.1) compared with 6.2mmol/L (SD = 5.2) in those who died, a difference that was statistically signi fi cant ( P = .05) (Table 3). The median SOFA score at the time of diagnosis was 6 (interquartile range [IQR] 4 -9.5) in the patients who died and 2 (IQR 0 -5) in those who survived, a difference that was also statistically signi fi cant ( P &lt; .01). Volume resuscitation was considered adequate in 79.7% of cases; however, there was no difference between the groups in relation to this variable (Table 3). Of the proximal variables, septic shock at admission (RR = 3.45, 95% CI = 1.64 -7.25), the need for vasopressor drugs during hospitalization (RR = 17.32, 95% CI = 4.20 -71.36), lactate levels &gt; 2 at the time of diagnosis (RR = 4.60, 95% CI = 1.05 -20.07), and SOFA score &gt; 2 at diagnosis (RR = 5.97, 95% CI = 1.82 -19.94), were all associated with a greater risk of death (Table 3). After multiple logistic regression, only the need for vasopressors during hospitalization remained a risk factor associated with death (odds ratio [OR] = 26.38; 95% CI = 5.87 -118.51).

Table 3

## Proximal factors associated with death in obstetric patients with sepsis.

|                                                     | Death   | Death   |   Death | Death   |       |              |            |
|-----------------------------------------------------|---------|---------|---------|---------|-------|--------------|------------|
| Characteristics                                     | Yes     | Yes     |         |         | RR    | 95% CI       | P -value   |
| Septic shock at admission (n/%)                     | 8       | 36.4    |      14 | 10.5    | 3.45  | 1.64 - 7.25  | .001       |
| Need for vasopressors during hospitalization (n/%)  | 20      | 90.9    |      36 | 27.5    | 17.32 | 4.20 - 71.36 | < .01 ∗ ∗∗ |
| Lactate levels at admission (Mean/SD)               | 6.2     | 5.2     |     2.5 | 2.1     | -     | -            | < .01 ∗    |
| Lactate > 2 at admission (n/%) a                    | 9       | 81.8    |      33 | 44.6    | 4.60  | 1.05 - 20.07 | .02        |
| SOFA at admission (Median/IQR)                      | 6       | 4 - 9.5 |       2 | 0 - 5   | -     | -            | < .01      |
| SOFA > 2 at admission (n/%)                         | 17      | 85.0    |      57 | 43.2    | 5.97  | 1.82 - 19.94 | < .01 ∗    |
| Inadequate hydration (n/%)                          | 6       | 27.3    |      24 | 18.0    | 1.56  | 0.66 - 3.65  | .31        |
| Time until the initiation of antibiotics > 1h (n/%) | 13      | 59.1    |      67 | 50.4    | 1.35  | 0.61 - 2.98  | .44        |

Recife, Pernambuco, Brazil, 2018. CI = con fi dence interval, RR = relative risk, SD = standard deviation.

a Data available for 85 patients only. ∗

∗∗ Mann -Whitney test.

Fisher exact test.

## 4. Discussion

Sepsis is a common cause of maternal admission to the ICU. In a previous study conducted in the same unit, sepsis accounted for 2.8% of admissions. [12] In the present study, in 3004 ICU admissions, 155 patients were diagnosed with sepsis (5.1%), a lower rate than that found in the United Kingdom, where severe sepsis accounted for 14.4% of admissions, [8] and in the Netherlands, where sepsis corresponded to 9.9% of maternal ICU admissions. [13] This lower rate can be explained by the fact that this is an exclusively obstetric ICU, with high rates of admission for hypertensive syndromes, a common complication of pregnancy and the major cause of maternal death in Brazil, [5] a situation that proportionately reduces the importance of sepsis as a cause of admission to ICU.

Twenty-two sepsis patients died (14.2%), resulting in a higher mortality rate compared with those reported from developed countries such as the United Kingdom (1.4%), [3] Ireland (no deaths between 2005 and 2012), [14] and the Netherlands (7.7%) [15] ;and similar to rates reported from African countries such as Malawi (16.4%) [16] and South Africa (9.5%). [17] The high death rate can be explained by the fact that the obstetric ICU at IMIP is the only obstetric ICU in the region, receiving patients referred from other units. Consequently, there is a natural tendency to receive cases of greater severity. In addition,