## RESEARCH

## Open Access

## One-year mortality prediction for patients with sepsis: a nomogram integrating lactic dehydrogenase and clinical characteristics

Jin Wang 1 , Weiyu Fei 2 and Qianying Song 2*

## Abstract

Background To explore the association between myocardial enzymes and one-year mortality, and establish a nomogram integrating myocardial enzymes and clinical characteristics to predict one-year mortality among sepsis patients.

Methods Data of 1,983 sepsis patients were extracted from Medical Information Mart for Intensive Care III database in this retrospective cohort study. All participants were randomly split into the training set for the development of model and testing set for the internal validation at the ratio of 7:3. Univariate logistic regression was used to screen variables with statistical differences which were made for stepwise regression, obtaining the predictors associated with one-year mortality of sepsis patients. Adopted multivariate logistic regression to assess the relationship between myocardial enzymes and one-year mortality of sepsis patients. A nomogram was established in predicting the one-year survival status of sepsis patients, and the performance of developed model were compared with LDH alone, sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA), simplified acute physiology score II (SAPS II) by receiver operator characteristic, calibration, and decision curves analysis.

Results The result found that LDH was associated with one-year mortality of sepsis patients [odds ratio = 1.28, 95% confidence interval (CI): 1.18-1.52]. Independent predictors, including age, gender, ethnicity, potassium, calcium, albumin, hemoglobin, alkaline phosphatase, vasopressor, Elixhauser score, respiratory failure, and LDH were identified and used to establish the nomogram (LDH-model) for predicting one-year mortality for sepsis patients. The predicted performance [area under curve (AUC) = 0.773, 95%CI: 0.748-0.798] of this developed nomogram in the training and testing sets (AUC = 0.750, 95%CI: 0.711-0.789), which was superior to that of LDH alone, SOFA score, SAPS II score. Additionally, calibration curve indicated that LDH-model may have a good agreement between the predictive and actual outcomes, while decision curve analysis demonstrated clinical utility of the LDH-model.

Conclusion LDH level was related to the risk of one-year mortality in sepsis patients. A prediction model based on LDH and clinical features was developed to predict one-year mortality risk of sepsis patients, surpassing the predictive ability of LDH alone as well as conventional SAPS II and SOFA scoring systems.

Keywords Lactic dehydrogenase, One-year mortality, Prediction model, Sepsis

*Correspondence:

Qianying Song

qianyingsong0623@outlook.com

1 Health Management Center, The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116023, People's Republic of China

2 Emergency Intensive Care Unit, The Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University, Dalian 116023, People's Republic of China

<!-- image -->

## Background

Sepsis, as a kind of complex disorder, is characterized by  severe  and  potentially  lethal  infection  accompanied  by  dysfunction  of  vital  organs  [1,  2].  At  present, the  incidence  and  mortality  of  sepsis  remains  high, which  was  considered  as  one  of  the  leading  causes  of

© The Author(s) 2023. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.

<!-- image -->

death  worldwide  [3].  The  annual  incidence  of  sepsis in  the  United  States  was  estimated  to  exceed  1.5  million cases, resulting in approximately 250,000 fatalities [4]. Previous studies have indicated a high incidence of myocardial organic damage in the early stage of sepsis, rendering these patients susceptible to heart failure and arrhythmia,  thereby  contributing  to  a  poor  prognosis among  septic  patients  [5-7].  The  high  mortality  and morbidity of sepsis impose a substantial financial burden on the healthcare system [8]. Therefore, it is crucial to identify the prognostic factors associated with sepsis aimed to provide accurate  treatment  and  increase  the chances of survival.

The  myocardial  injury  has  been  widely  recognized  as the main manifestation of multiple organ dysfunction in sepsis [9], and it has been observed that sepsis may cause myocardial damage. Myocardial enzymes are important indicators  in  assessing  both  myocardial  function  and myocardial  damage.  In  general,  myocardial  enzymes included creatine kinase (CK), creatine kinase isoenzyme (CK-MB),  aspartic transoxygenase (AST), and lactic dehydrogenase (LDH). The levels of myocardial enzymes could reflect the extent of cellular damages and vary with the severity of infection [10]. The levels of LDH have also been observed to increase in accordance with the severity of the infection, suggesting that LDH levels may serve as  a  prognostic  factor  for  sepsis  [11].  In  addition,  Jeon, et  al.  have  reported  that  LDH  to  albumin  (LDH/ALB) ratio  might  be  a  prognostic  factor  among  patients  with severe  infection  requiring  intensive  care  [10].  Clinical decision tools could help clinician to identify those at risk of poor outcomes for sepsis patients. Nowadays, several studies have developed prediction models to predict the prognosis  of  sepsis  patients,  including  machine  learning model, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score,  Quick  SOFA  (qSOFA)  score,  and  Logistic  Organ Dysfunction System (LODS) score [12, 13]. Nevertheless, to  the  best  of  our  knowledge,  there  were few studies to combine clinical features to make a diagnosis to date.

Herein, the purpose of this study was to investigate the relationship  between  various  myocardial  enzymes  and one-year mortality among patients with sepsis using the Medical  Information  Mart  for  Intensive  Care  (MIMICIII)  database,  and  to  establish  a  prediction  model  in which combining clinical features in predicting the risk of one-year mortality in patients with sepsis.

## Methods

## Data sources and study population

All information of this study were obtained from MIMIC-III  database,  which  is  a  large, single-center, freely  available  database  [14].  The  database  contained comprehensive clinical  data  of  patients  admitted  to  the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center in Boston, Massachusetts between 2001-2012, and was released on 2016. Over 40,000 patients who have been exempted from personal information were included in this database [15].

We selected patients from MIMIC-III database between  2001-2012  in  this  retrospective  cohort  study. We  analyzed  only  septic  patients  admitted  to  the  ICU for  the  first  time.  The  inclusion  criteria:  (1)  patients were  diagnosed  with  sepsis  was  defined  as  life-threatening  organ  dysfunction  caused  by  a  dysregulated  host response  to  infection  according  to  the  Sepsis-3  criteria  [16,  17];  (2)  patients  had  complete  data  on  myocardial  enzymes.  The  exclusion  criteria  are  as  follows:  (1) patients aged &lt; 18 years; (2) admission time &lt; 24 h in the ICU;  (3)  survival  time &lt; 1  day  (Fig.  1).  The  experimental  protocol  was  approved  by  the  Institutional  Review Boards  of  Beth  Israel  Deaconess  Medical  Center  (Boston, MA) and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Cambridge, MA). This study did not require an approval of the Second Hospital of Dalian Medical University ethics  committee because the data about included patients derived from publicly available database. All individuals provided  written  informed  consent  before  participating in the study. All methods were carried out in accordance with  relevant  guidelines  and  regulations  (declaration  of Helsinki).

Fig. 1 Flowchart showing the selection of study population. (ICU, medical intensive care unit)

<!-- image -->

## Potential predictors

The demographic data about eligible patients were extracted from the MIMIC-III database: age (years), gender, ethnicity, marital status. The vital signs and laboratory  values:  respiratory  rate  (times/min),  temperature ( ℃ ), heart rate (times/min), systolic blood pressure (SBP, mmHg),  diastolic  blood  pressure  (DBP,  mmHg),  mean arterial  pressure  (MAP,  mmHg),  pulse  oxygen  saturation    (SPO 2 ),  white  blood  cell  count  (WBC,  K/uL),  red blood  count  (RBC,  m/uL),  sodium  (mEq/L),  potassium (mEq/L),  phosphate  (mg/dL),  calcium  (mg/dL),  magnesium (mg/dL), platelet count (PLT, K/uL), pH, lactate (mmol/L),  glucose  (mg/dL),  creatinine  (mg/dL),  blood urea nitrogen (BUN, mg/dL), bicarbonate (mEq/L), albumin,  total  bilirubin  (TBIL,  mg/dL),  hematocrit  (%), hemoglobin (g/dL), mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (MCHC), alkaline phosphatase (ALP), alanine aminotransferase  (ALT,  U/L),  LDH  (U/L),  CK  (U/L), CK-MB (U/L), AST (U/L), oxygen partial pressure   (PO 2 ), partial pressure of carbon dioxide   (PCO 2 ). Comorbidities: congestive  heart  failure,  malignant  tumor,  atrial  fibrillation,  respiratory  failure,  septic  shock  and  Elixhauser score. Severity score: sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA)  score  and  simplified  acute  physiology  score  II (SAPS II). Outcomes data: intensive care unit (ICU) type, length of stay, renal replacement therapy (RRT), ventilation and vasopressor. All variables were collected within 24 h of patients' admission to the ICU. Length of stay was considered as the admission time in the ICU.

To  describe  comorbidities  more  succinctly,  we  used Elixhauser score. Elixhauser score includes 30 comorbidities,  such  as  hypertension,  diabetes,  renal  failure,  hypothyroidism, cardiac arrhythmias and so on [18, 19].

## Outcomes and follow-up

The  outcome  was  one-year  survival  status  of  sepsis patients  after  ICU  admission.  Follow-up  started  at  the time  of  patients'  admission,  and  was  terminated  when death occurred. The follow-up duration was one-year and the  median  follow-up  time  was  143.19  (15.45,  365.00) days.

## Statistical analysis

Kolmogorov-Smirnov  was  used  to  test  the  normality of measurement  data.  Mean ± standard deviation (Mean ± SD)  and  Median  and  quartile  spacing  [M  (Q1, Q3)] described the normal and non-normal distribution of the measurement data, respectively; and the comparison between the two groups was performed by Student's t-test  and  rank-sum  test,  respectively.  The  categorical data was depicted by the number of cases and composition ratio n (%), and difference of groups were compared by  χ 2 test.  These  missing  values  were  interpolated  by using multiple interpolation method, and sensitivity analysis was performed by using data filled before and after between groups (Supplemental Table 1).

First, the total participants were randomly split into the training set for the development of model and the testing set for the internal validation of model at the ratio of 7:3,  and  we  conducted a balance test between two sets. Then, the patients in the training set were subsequently categorized  into  two  groups,  namely  the  death  group and  the  survival  group,  based  on  their  one-year  mortality  or  survival  status.  Subsequently,  a  comparison  of variables was conducted between these two groups. We utilized  univariate  logistic  regression  to  identify  variables  exhibiting  statistically  significant  differences,  and made  these  variables  to  stepwise  regression  to  obtain predictors  associated  with  one-year  mortality  of  sepsis  patients.  A  multivariate  logistic  regression  analysis was introduced to assess the relationship between various myocardial enzymes and one-year mortality among patients with sepsis: Model 1 was a coarse model; Model 2  adjusted  age,  gender,  ethnicity,  potassium,  calcium, albumin, hemoglobin, ALP, vasopressor, Elixhauser score, and respiratory failure. Subsequently, a prediction model combining  myocardial  enzymes  and  other  predictors was  established  in  predicting  the  one-year  survival  status of patients with sepsis. The performance of developed model was compared with SOFA score, SAPSII score by some  indexes,  including  receiver  operator  characteristic curve (ROC) analysis, calibration curve and decision curve analysis (DCA). The inter-group comparisons were performed using SAS 9.4 software, and all statistics were performed  using  R  3.6.3  software.  All  statistical  tests were conducted by two-sided tests, and P &lt;  0.05 was considered as statistically significant.

## Results

## Participants' characteristics

We  excluded  some  patients  who  were  aged &lt; 18  years ( n = 10), were &lt; 24  h  of  admission  time  in  the  ICU ( n = 400)  and  were &lt; 1  day  of  survival  time  ( n = 115).  A total  of  1,983  eligible  patients  were  eventually  included, which were randomly divided into training set ( n = 1,388) and testing set ( n = 595). The baseline characteristics  for  all  enrolled  patients  were  listed  in  Supplemental  Table  2.  The  mean  age  of  the  total  population  was 67.79 ± 15.31 years old. 46.44% of sepsis patients had congestive  heart  failure,  26.42%  had  a  history  of  malignant