762

## Original Investigation | CARINGFORTHECRITICALLYILLPATIENT

## Assessment of Clinical Criteria for Sepsis For the Third International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock (Sepsis-3)

Christopher W. Seymour, MD, MSc; Vincent X. Liu, MD, MSc; Theodore J. Iwashyna, MD, PhD; Frank M. Brunkhorst, MD; Thomas D. Rea, MD, MPH; André Scherag, PhD; Gordon Rubenfeld, MD, MSc; Jeremy M. Kahn, MD, MSc; Manu Shankar-Hari, MD, MSc; Mervyn Singer, MD, FRCP; Clifford S. Deutschman, MD, MS; Gabriel J. Escobar, MD; Derek C. Angus, MD, MPH

- [Editorial page 757](http://jama.jamanetwork.com/article.aspx?doi=10.1001/jama.2016.0290&utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jama.2016.0288)
- Author Audio Interview at jama.com
- Related articles pages 775 and 801
- Supplemental content at jama.com

Author Affiliations: Author affiliations are listed at the end of this article.

Corresponding Author: Christopher W. Seymour, MD, MSc, Departments of Critical Care Medicine and Emergency Medicine, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, Clinical Research, Investigation, and Systems Modeling of Acute Illness (CRISMA) Center, 3550 Terrace St, Scaife Hall, Ste 639, Pittsburgh, PA 15261 (seymourcw@upmc.edu).

(Reprinted)

[jama.com](http://www.jama.com/?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jama.2016.0288)

IMPORTANCE The Third International Consensus Definitions Task Force defined sepsis as 'life-threatening organ dysfunction due to a dysregulated host response to infection.' The performance of clinical criteria for this sepsis definition is unknown.

OBJECTIVE To evaluate the validity of clinical criteria to identify patients with suspected infection who are at risk of sepsis.

DESIGN, SETTINGS, AND POPULATION Among1.3 million electronic health record encounters from January 1, 2010, to December 31, 2012, at 12 hospitals in southwestern Pennsylvania, we identified those with suspected infection in whom to compare criteria. Confirmatory analyses were performed in 4 data sets of 706 399 out-of-hospital and hospital encounters at 165 US and non-US hospitals ranging from January 1, 2008, until December 31, 2013.

EXPOSURES Sequential [Sepsis-related] Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score, systemic inflammatoryresponsesyndrome(SIRS)criteria,Logistic Organ Dysfunction System (LODS) score, and a new model derived using multivariable logistic regression in a split sample, the quick Sequential [Sepsis-related] Organ Failure Assessment (qSOFA) score (range, 0-3 points, with 1 point each for systolic hypotension [ ≤ 100mmHg],tachypnea[ ≥ 22/min], or altered mentation).

MAINOUTCOMESANDMEASURES For construct validity, pairwise agreement was assessed. For predictive validity, the discrimination for outcomes (primary: in-hospital mortality; secondary: in-hospital mortality or intensive care unit [ICU] length of stay ≥ 3 days) more commonin sepsis than uncomplicated infection was determined. Results were expressed as the fold change in outcome over deciles of baseline risk of death and area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC).

RESULTS In the primary cohort, 148 907 encounters had suspected infection (n = 74 453 derivation; n = 74 454 validation), of whom 6347 (4%) died. Among ICU encounters in the validation cohort (n = 7932 with suspected infection, of whom 1289 [16%] died), the predictive validity for in-hospital mortality was lower for SIRS (AUROC = 0.64; 95% CI, 0.62-0.66) and qSOFA(AUROC = 0.66;95%CI,0.64-0.68)vsSOFA(AUROC = 0.74;95%CI,0.73-0.76; P &lt; .001 for both) or LODS (AUROC = 0.75; 95% CI, 0.73-0.76; P &lt; .001 for both). Among non-ICU encounters in the validation cohort (n = 66 522 with suspected infection, of whom 1886[3%]died), qSOFA had predictive validity (AUROC = 0.81; 95% CI, 0.80-0.82) that was greater than SOFA (AUROC = 0.79; 95% CI, 0.78-0.80; P &lt; .001) and SIRS (AUROC = 0.76; 95% CI, 0.75-0.77; P &lt; .001). Relative to qSOFA scores lower than 2, encounters with qSOFA scores of 2orhigher had a 3- to 14-fold increase in hospital mortality across baseline risk deciles. Findings weresimilar in external data sets and for the secondary outcome.

CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE AmongICUencounters with suspected infection, the predictive validity for in-hospital mortality of SOFA was not significantly different than the more complex LODS but was statistically greater than SIRS and qSOFA, supporting its use in clinical criteria for sepsis. Among encounters with suspected infection outside of the ICU, the predictive validity for in-hospital mortality of qSOFA was statistically greater than SOFA and SIRS, supporting its use as a prompt to consider possible sepsis.

JAMA . 2016;315(8):762-774. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.0288 Corrected on May 24, 2016.r2016;315(8):762-774. doi:10.1001/jama.2016.0288

A lthough common and associated with high morbidity and mortality, 1,2 sepsis and related terms remain difficult to define. Two international consensus conferencesin1991and2001usedexpertopiniontogeneratethecurrentdefinitions. 3,4 However,advancesintheunderstandingof the pathobiology and appreciation that elements of the definitions may be outdated, inaccurate, or confusing prompted

EHR electronic health record

GCS Glasgow Coma Scale

ICU intensive care unit

LODS

Logistic Organ Dysfunction

System

qSOFA

quick Sequential

[Sepsis-related] Organ Function Assessment

SIRS

systemic inflammatory

response syndrome

SOFA

Sequential [Sepsis-related]

Organ Function Assessment

the European Society of Intensive Care Medicine and the Society of Critical Care Medicine to convene a Third International Consensus Task Force to reexamine the definitions. Like many syndromes, there is no 'gold standard' diagnostic test for sepsis. Therefore, the task force chose several methodstoevaluatetheuseful-

ness of candidate clinical criteria, including clarity, reliability (consistency and availability), content validity (biologic rationale and face validity), construct validity (agreement between similar measures), criterion validity (correlation with established measures and outcomes), burden, and timeliness. Unlike prior efforts, the task force used systematic literature reviews and empirical data analyses to complement expert deliberations.

Based on clarity and content validity and after literature review and expert deliberation, the task force recommended elimination of the terms sepsis syndrome , septicemia , and severe sepsis and instead defined sepsis as 'life-threatening organ dysfunction due to a dysregulated host response to infection.' 5 Ofnote,thetaskforcedidnotattempttoredefine infection. Rather, it next sought to generate recommendations for clinical criteria that could be used to identify sepsis among patients with suspected or confirmed infection. The purposeofthisstudywastoinformthisstepbyanalyzingdata fromseverallarge hospital databases to explore the construct validity and criterion validity of existing and novel criteria associated with sepsis.

## Methods

This study was approved with waiver of informed consent by the institutional review boards of the University of Pittsburgh, Kaiser Permanente Northern California (KPNC), Veterans Administration (VA) Ann Arbor Health System, Washington State Department of Health, King County Emergency Medical Services (KCEMS), University of Washington, and Jena University Hospital.

## Study Design, Setting, and Population

Aretrospective cohort study was performed among adult encounters (age ≥18 years) with suspected infection. The primarycohort was all hospital encounters from 2010 to 2012 at 12communityandacademichospitalsintheUPMChealthcare

jama.com systeminsouthwesternPennsylvania.Thecohortincludedall medical and surgical encounters in the emergency department, hospital ward, and intensive care unit (ICU). We createdarandomsplitsample(50/50)fromtheUPMCcohort,the derivation cohort for developing new criteria, and the validation cohort for assessment of new and existing criteria.

We also studied 4 external data sets: (1) all inpatient encounters at 20 KPNC hospitals from 2009 to 2013; (2) all encounters in 130 hospitals in the United States' VA system from 2008 to 2010; (3) all nontrauma, nonarrest emergency medical services records from 5 advanced life support agencies from 2009-2010 transported to 14 hospitals with communityinfectioninKingCounty,Washington(KCEMS) 6 ;and(4)all patients from 2011-2012 at 1 German hospital enrolled with hospital-acquired infection in the ALERTS prospective cohort study. 7 Thesecohortswereselectedbecausetheyincludedpatientencountersfromdifferentphasesofacutecare(outofhospital, emergency department, hospital ward) and countries (United States and Germany) with different types of infection (community and nosocomial). The UPMC, KPNC, and VA data wereobtainedfromtheelectronichealthrecords(EHRs)ofthe respectivehealthsystems;KCEMSdatawereobtainedfromthe administrative out-of-hospital record; and ALERTS data were collected prospectively by research coordinators.

## Defining a Cohort With Suspected Infection

For EHR data (UPMC, KPNC, and VA), the first episode of suspectedinfection was identified as the combination of antibiotics (oral or parenteral) and body fluid cultures (blood, urine, cerebrospinal fluid, etc). We required the combination of culture and antibiotic start time to occur within a specific time epoch. If the antibiotic was given first, the culture sampling must have beenobtainedwithin24hours.Iftheculturesamplingwasfirst, theantibioticmusthavebeenorderedwithin72hours.The'onset' of infection was defined as the time at which the first of these 2 events occurred (eAppendix in the Supplement). For non-EHR data in ALERTS, patients were included who met US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention definitions or clinical criteria for hospital-acquired infection more than 48 hoursafteradmissionasdocumentedbyprospectivescreening. 7 For non-EHR data in KCEMS, administrative claims identified infection present on admission (Angus implementation of infection using International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification ( ICD-9-CM ) diagnosis codes). 6

## DeterminingClinicalCriteriaforSepsisUsingExistingMeasures

In UPMC derivation and validation data, indicators were generated for each component of the systemic inflammatory response syndrome (SIRS) criteria 4 ; the Sequential [Sepsisrelated] Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score 8 ; and the Logistic Organ Dysfunction System (LODS) score, 9 a weighted organ dysfunction score ( Table 1 ). We used a modified version of the LODS score that did not contain urine output (because ofpooraccuracyinrecordingonhospitalwardencounters),prothrombin, or urea levels. The maximum SIRS criteria, SOFA score, and modified LODS score were calculated for the time windowfrom48hoursbeforeto24hoursaftertheonsetofinfection, as well as on each calendar day. This window was used

(Reprinted)

| Table 1. Variables for Candidate Sepsis Criteria AmongEncounters With Suspected Infection   | Table 1. Variables for Candidate Sepsis Criteria AmongEncounters With Suspected Infection   | Table 1. Variables for Candidate Sepsis Criteria AmongEncounters With Suspected Infection   | Table 1. Variables for Candidate Sepsis Criteria AmongEncounters With Suspected Infection   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Systemic Inflammatory Response Syndrome (SIRS) Criteria (Range, 0-4 Criteria)               | Sequential [Sepsis-related] Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) (Range, 0-24 Points)            | Logistic Organ Dysfunction System (LODS) (Range, 0-22 Points) a                             | Quick Sequential [Sepsis-related] Organ Failure Assessment (qSOFA) (Range, 0-3 Points)      |
| Respiratory rate, breaths per minute                                                        | PaO 2 /FiO 2 ratio                                                                          | PaO 2 /FiO 2 ratio                                                                          | Respiratory rate, breaths per minute                                                        |
| White blood cell count, 10 9 /L                                                             | Glasgow Coma Scale score                                                                    | Glasgow Coma Scale score                                                                    | Glasgow Coma Scale score                                                                    |
| Bands,%                                                                                     | Mean arterial pressure,mmHg                                                                 | Systolic blood pressure,mmHg                                                                | Systolic blood pressure,mmHg                                                                |
| Heart rate, beats per minute                                                                | Administration of vasopressors with type/dose/rate of infusion                              | Heart rate, beats per minute                                                                |                                                                                             |
| Temperature, °C                                                                             | Serum creatinine, mg/dL, or urine output, mL/d                                              | Serum creatinine, mg/dL                                                                     |                                                                                             |
| Arterial carbon dioxide tension, mmHg                                                       | Bilirubin, mg/dL                                                                            | Bilirubin, mg/dL                                                                            |                                                                                             |
|                                                                                             | Platelet count, 10 9 /L                                                                     | Platelet count, 10 9 /L                                                                     |                                                                                             |
|                                                                                             |                                                                                             | White blood cell count, 10 9 /L                                                             |                                                                                             |
|                                                                                             |                                                                                             | Urine output, L/d                                                                           |                                                                                             |
|                                                                                             |                                                                                             | Serum urea, mmol/L                                                                          |                                                                                             |
|                                                                                             |                                                                                             | Prothrombin time, %of standard                                                              |                                                                                             |

for candidate criteria because organ dysfunction in sepsis may occur prior to, near the moment of, or after infection is recognized by clinicians or when a patient presents for care. Moreover, the clinical documentation, reporting of laboratory values in EHRs, and trajectory of organ dysfunction are heterogeneousacrossencountersandhealthsystems.Inapost hocanalysisrequestedbythetaskforce,achangeinSOFAscore was calculated of 2 points or more from up to 48 hours before to up to 24 hours after the onset of infection.

## Deriving Novel Clinical Criteria for Sepsis

In the derivation cohort (UPMC), new, simple criteria were developedaccordingtotheTransparentReportingofaMultivariable Prediction Model for Individual Prognosis or Diagnosis (TRIPOD)recommendations. 10 Thisentailed2steps:(1)assessingcandidatevariablequalityandfrequencyofmissingdataand (2)developingaparsimoniousmodelandsimplepointscore. 3,8,11 Becauseofthesubjectivenatureandcomplexityofvariablesin existing criteria, we sought a simple model that could easily be used by a clinician at the bedside.

Based on the assumption that hospital mortality would be farmorecommoninencounterswithinfectedpatientswhohave sepsis than in those who do not, all continuous variables were dichotomizedbydefiningtheiroptimalcutoffsusingtheminimum0/1distanceontheareaunderthereceiveroperatingcharacteristiccurve(AUROC)forin-hospitalmortality. 12 Cutoffswere rounded to the nearest integer, and standard single-value imputation was used, with normal value substitution if variables were missing. The latter approach is standard in clinical risk scores 8,13,14 and mirrors how clinicians would use the score at the bedside. Multiple logistic regression was used with robust standard errors and forward selection of candidate variables using the Bayesian information criterion to develop the 'quick SOFA' (qSOFA) model. The Bayesian information criterion is a likelihood-based stepwise approach that retains variables that improve the model's overall ability to predict the outcome of

764 JAMA February 23, 2016 Volume 315, Number 8

(Reprinted)

Abbreviation: FiO 2 , fraction of inspired oxygen.

a Measurement units for LODS variables per original description by Le Gall et al. 9

interest while incorporating a penalty for including too many variables. Favoring simplicity over accuracy, a point score of 1 was assigned to each variable in the final model, irrespective of the regression coefficients. Model calibration was assessed bycomparingclinically relevant differences in observed vs expected outcomes, as the Hosmer-Lemeshow test may be significant due to large sample sizes. 15

## Assessments of Candidate Clinical Criteria

Thetest:retestorinterraterreliabilityofindividualelementswas not assessed, in part because most elements have known reliability. However, the frequency of missing data was determined for each element because more common missing data for individual elements will potentially affect the reliability of integratedscoressuchastheSOFAscore.Constructvaliditywas determined by examining the agreement between different measures analogous to the multitrait-multimethod matrix approach of Campbell and Fiske, using the Cronbach α to measureagreementorcommonality. 16,17 Confidenceintervalswere generated with the bootstrap method (100 replications).

Criterion validity was assessed using the predictive validity of the candidate criteria with outcomes (primary outcome: in-hospital mortality; secondary outcome: in-hospital mortality or intensivecareunit[ICU]lengthofstay≥3days).Theseoutcomes are objective, easily measured across multiple hospitals in US/non-US cohorts, and are more likely to be present in encounters with patients with sepsis than those with uncomplicatedinfection.Tomeasurepredictivevalidity,abaselinerisk modelwascreatedforin-hospitalmortalitybasedonpreinfection criteria using multivariable logistic regression. The baseline model included age (as a fractional polynomial), sex, race/ ethnicity (black, white, or other), and the weighted Charlson comorbidity score (as fractional polynomial) as a measure of chronic comorbidities. 18,19 Race/ethnicity was derived from UPMC registration system data using fixed categories consistent with the Centers for Medicare &amp; Medicaid Services EHR

## Table 2. Summary of Data Sets

| Characteristics                                  | UPMC a                                                                                       | KPNC                                                                                         | VA                                                                                           | ALERTS                                          | KCEMS                                                                                                |
|--------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------|------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Years of cohort                                  | 2010-2012                                                                                    | 2009-2013                                                                                    | 2008-2010                                                                                    | 2011-2012                                       | 2009-2010                                                                                            |
| No. of hospitals                                 | 12                                                                                           | 20                                                                                           | 130                                                                                          | 1                                               | 14                                                                                                   |
| Total No. of encounters                          | 1309025                                                                                      | 1847165                                                                                      | 1640543                                                                                      | 38098                                           | 50727                                                                                                |
| Data source and study design                     | Retrospective study of EHRs                                                                  | Retrospective study of EHRs                                                                  | Retrospective study of EHRs                                                                  | Prospective cohort study                        | Retrospective study of administrative records                                                        |
| Setting                                          | Integrated health system in southwestern Pennsylvania                                        | Integrated health system in northern California                                              | All hospitals in the US VA system                                                            | Single university hospital, Jena, Germany       | Out-of-hospital records from integrated emergency medical services system in King County, Washington |
| Definition of suspected infection                | Combination of body fluid culture and nonprophylactic antibiotic administration in the EHR b | Combination of body fluid culture and nonprophylactic antibiotic administration in the EHR b | Combination of body fluid culture and nonprophylactic antibiotic administration in the EHR b | CDC criteria for hospital-acquired infections c | ICD-9-CM codes for infection, with present-on-admission indicators d                                 |
| No. with suspected infection (% of total)        | 148907 (11)                                                                                  | 321380 (17)                                                                                  | 377325 (23)                                                                                  | 1186 (3)                                        | 6508 (13)                                                                                            |
| Location at onset of infection, No. (%) infected |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |                                                                                              |                                                 |                                                                                                      |
| Intensive care unit                              | 15768 (11)                                                                                   | 7031 (2)                                                                                     | 73264 (19)                                                                                   | 300 (25)                                        | 0                                                                                                    |
| Outside of intensive care unit                   | 133139 (89)                                                                                  | 314349 (98)                                                                                  | 304061 (81)                                                                                  | 886 (75)                                        | 6508 (100)                                                                                           |
| In-hospital mortality, No. (%) infected e        | 6347 (4)                                                                                     | 16092 (5)                                                                                    | 22593 (6)                                                                                    | 210 (18)                                        | 700 (11)                                                                                             |

Abbreviations: KCEMS, King County Emergency Medical Services; KPNC, Kaiser Permanente Northern California; EHR, electronic health record; ICD-9-CM , International Classification of Diseases, Ninth Revision, Clinical Modification ; VA, Veterans Administration.

- a Referred to as the primary cohort, further divided into derivation (n = 74 453) and validation (n = 74 454) cohorts.

b See the eAppendix in the Supplement for details about time windows specified between body fluid cultures and antibiotic administration.

meaningful use data set. 20 Race/ethnicity was included in the baselinemodelbecauseofitsdescribedassociationwiththeincidence and outcomes of sepsis. 21

Encounterswerethendividedintodecilesofbaselinerisk. Within each decile, the rate of in-hospital mortality ± ICU length of stay of 3 days or longer was determined comparing encounters with infection with 2 or more SIRS, SOFA, LODS, andqSOFApointsvsencounterswithlessthan2criteriaofthe same score (threshold of 2 points was determined a priori). Model discrimination was assessed with the AUROC for each outcome using the continuous score(s) alone, then added to the baseline risk model. Analyses were separately performed in ICU encounters and non-ICU encounters at the onset of infection. New, simple criteria in external data sets were assessed in both ICU and non-ICU encounters.

Because serum lactate is widely used as a screening tool insepsis, 22 howitsmeasurementwouldimprovepredictivevalidity of new criteria was assessed in post hoc analyses. Evaluation included qSOFA models that did and did not include serum lactate at thresholds of 2.0, 3.0, and 4.0 mmol/L (18, 27, and36mg/dL)andasacontinuousvariable. 23 OnlyKPNCdata were used for these analyses because an ongoing quality improvement program promoting frequent serum lactate measurementacrossthehealthsystemminimizedconfoundingby indication. 24

Several sensitivity analyses were performed to assess robustness of the findings. These included a variety of restrictions to the cohort, more rigorous definitions of suspected or

[jama.com](http://www.jama.com/?utm_campaign=articlePDF%26utm_medium=articlePDFlink%26utm_source=articlePDF%26utm_content=jama.2016.0288)

- c Patients were enrolled in ALERTS if the in-hospital stay was longer than 48 hours and in-person prospective screening revealed hospital-acquired infection criteria according to Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) guidelines. 7
- d Required Angus implementation ICD-9-CM code for infection accompanied by present-on-admission indicator, as previously validated. 6
- e AmongUPMCencounters, 28286 (19%) had in-hospital mortality plus intensive care unit length of stay of 3 days or longer.

presumedinfection,alternativewaystomeasureclinicalvariables (such as altered mentation in the EHR), and multiple imputation analyses for missing data. There are many possible time windows for criteria around the onset of infection. A variety of windows differing from the primary analysis were tested, including (1) 3 hours before to 3 hours after; (2) 12 hours beforeto12hoursafter;and(3)restrictingtoonlythe24hours after the onset of infection. Detailed descriptions are in the Supplement.

All analyses were performed with STATA software, version 11.0 (Stata Corp). All tests of significance used a 2-sided P ≤ .05. We considered AUROCs to be poor at 0.6 to 0.7, adequate at 0.7 to 0.8, good at 0.8 to 0.9, and excellent at 0.9 or higher. 25

## Results

## Cohorts and Encounter Characteristics

At 177 hospitals in 5 US and non-US data sets between 2008 and2013( Table 2 ), 4 885 558 encounters were studied. In the primarycohortof1309025records(UPMCderivationandvalidation; Figure 1 ), 148 907 encounters had suspected infection, most often presenting outside of the ICU (n = 133 139 [89%]).Asshownin Table3 , first infection was commonly suspected within 48 hours of admission (86%), most often presenting in the emergency department (44%) compared with the ward (33%) or ICU (11%), and mortality was low (4%). The

(Reprinted)