## RESEARCH

## Open Access

## Persistent high sepsis-induced coagulopathy and sequential organ failure assessment scores can predict the 28-day mortality of patients with sepsis: A prospective study

<!-- image -->

Junyu Li 1,2 , Huizhen Liu 1,2 , Na Wang 2 , Fengrong Wang 2 , Na Shang 1 , Shubin Guo 1* and Guodong Wang 3*

## Abstract

Background The performance of the sepsis-induced coagulopathy (SIC) and sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) scores in predicting the prognoses of patients with sepsis has been validated. This study aimed to investigate the time course of SIC and SOFA scores and their association with outcomes in patients with sepsis.

Methods This prospective study enrolled 209 patients with sepsis admitted to the emergency department. The SIC and SOFA scores of the patients were assessed on days 1, 2, and 4. Patients were categorized into survivor or nonsurvivor groups based on their 28-day survival. We conducted a generalized estimating equation analysis to evaluate the time course of SIC and SOFA scores and the corresponding differences between the two groups. The predictive value of SIC and SOFA scores at different time points for sepsis prognosis was evaluated.

Results In the non-survivor group, SIC and SOFA scores gradually increased during the first 4 days ( P &lt; 0.05). In the survivor group, the SIC and SOFA scores on day 2 were significantly higher than those on day 1 ( P &lt; 0.05); however, they decreased on day 4, dropping below the levels observed on day 1 ( P &lt; 0.05). The non-survivors showed higher SIC scores on days 2 ( P &lt; 0.05) and 4 ( P &lt; 0.001) than the survivors, whereas no significant differences were found between the two groups on day 1 ( P &gt; 0.05). The performance of SIC scores on day 4 for predicting mortality was more accurate than that on day 2, with areas under the curve of 0.749 (95% confidence interval [CI]: 0.674-0.823), and 0.601 (95% CI: 0.524-0.679), respectively. The SIC scores demonstrated comparable predictive accuracy for 28-day mortality to the SOFA scores on days 2 and 4. Cox proportional hazards models indicated that SIC on day 4 (hazard ratio [HR] = 3.736; 95% CI: 2.025-6.891) was an independent risk factor for 28-day mortality.

Conclusions The time course of SIC and SOFA scores differed between surviving and non-surviving patients with sepsis, and persistent high SIC and SOFA scores can predict 28-day mortality.

Keywords Sepsis, Sepsis-induced coagulopathy, Sequential organ failure assessment score, Time course, Prognosis

*Correspondence:

Shubin Guo

shubin007@yeah.net

Guodong Wang

wangguodong@ccmu.edu.cn

1 Department of Emergency Medicine, Beijing Chao-Yang Hospital, Beijing Key Laboratory of Cardiopulmonary Cerebral Resuscitation, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China

<!-- image -->

2 Department of Emergency Medicine, Capital Medical University School of Rehabilitation Medicine, Beijing Bo'Ai Hospital, China Rehabilitation Research Center , Beijing, China

3 Cardiovascular Department, Capital Medical University School of Rehabilitation Medicine, Beijing Bo'Ai Hospital, China Rehabilitation Research Center, Beijing, China

© The Author(s) 2024. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.

## Background

Sepsis  is  defined  as  'life-threatening  organ  dysfunction caused by a dysregulated host response to infection' [1]. Despite a decrease in mortality among patients with sepsis  due to the promotion of the 'Surviving Sepsis Campaign, ' sepsis remains a major cause of death worldwide [2]. Recent studies have shown that the mortality rate of sepsis  is  40%  in  the  intensive  care  unit  (ICU)  and  26% in all hospitals [3]. The evaluation and prediction of the prognoses  of  patients  with  sepsis  are  crucial  for  early stratification and accurate treatment. Coagulopathy may be experienced by 50-70% of patients with sepsis, which ranges  from  mild  thrombocytopenia  to  disseminated intravascular  coagulation  (DIC)  [4-5].  In  patients  with sepsis,  coagulopathy  causes  organ  dysfunction  due  to microvascular  thrombosis  and  is  related  to  unfavorable prognoses [6].

Currently, sepsis-associated coagulopathy  is mostly evaluated  using  scoring  systems,  such  as  the  International  Society  on  Thrombosis  and  Hemostasis  (ISTH) overt-DIC  criteria,  the  Japanese  Association  for  Acute Medicine (JAAM) DIC criteria, and the Japanese Society on Thrombosis and Hemostasis DIC criteria [7-9]. However, these diagnostic scoring systems are either too intricate or too focused on various underlying diseases rather than  specifically  on  sepsis,  and  the  pathophysiology  of coagulopathy differs between diseases. For example, suppressed  fibrinolysis is significant in  sepsis-associated coagulopathy  due  to  increased  plasminogen  activator inhibitor-1  levels,  which  result  in  hypercoagulation  and unfavorable microthrombosis [10]. The JAAM DIC criteria  are  more  specific  for  sepsis  and  have  been  reported to be valuable in predicting poor prognoses for patients with sepsis [11] and recognizing appropriate candidates for anticoagulant therapy [12]. However, as one of the 4 items  included  in  the  JAAM  DIC  criteria  [8],  systemic inflammatory  response  syndrome  has  been  replaced  by sequential organ failure assessment (SOFA) score in the new  sepsis  definition  [1].  Therefore,  in  2017,  the  ISTH proposed  sepsis-induced  coagulopathy  (SIC)  diagnostic criteria specifically for sepsis based on SOFA score [13] to identify septic coagulopathy early and direct anticoagulation treatment. The SOFA score was used to confirm the presence of sepsis, not to reflect the severity; therefore, the score for SOFA was limited to two points even if the SOFA score was more than two [14]. Although the SIC criteria are relatively simple compared to the JAAM DIC criteria,  they  are  comparable  concerning  mortality prediction [15].

The  prognostic  power  of  the  SIC  scoring  system  for patients  with  sepsis  has  been  evaluated  recently;  however,  the  results  have  been  inconsistent.  Lu  et  al.  [16] found  that  the  SIC  score  could  predict  both  7-day  and 28-day  mortality  in  patients  with  sepsis  in  the  ICU.

However, another study reported that the SIC score was an  independent  risk  factor  for  in-hospital  mortality  in patients  with  septic  shock  rather  than  in  other  patients with sepsis [17]. According to Schmoch et al. [18], SIC is associated with significantly higher 28-day, 90-day, 180day, and ICU mortality in patients with sepsis rather than in  those  with  septic  shock.  Some  experts  suggest  that the  coagulation  dysfunction  in  patients  with  sepsis  is  a dynamic and evolving process [19]. Park et al. [20] found that  among  septic  patients,  the  mean  ISTH-DIC  scores on  day  1  and  day  3  were  4.0 ± 1.2  and  4.0 ± 1.3,  respectively; however, after grouping patients according to hospital mortality, the mean DIC scores on day 1 and day 3 were 3.8 ± 1.1  and  3.6 ± 1.1  respectively in survivors, and 4.3 ± 1.3 and 4.8 ± 1.5 respectively in non-survivors. Similarly, the trend of platelet changes varies among patients with different prognoses [21]. SOFA score was proposed to assess the severity of organ dysfunction in critically ill patients [22]. Extensive studies have been conducted on the importance of SOFA scores in predicting the prognoses of patients with sepsis, and the findings revealed that SOFA  scores  demonstrated  strong  predictive  power  in assessing mortality [23-25].

Although  many  studies  have  focused  on  the  performance of SIC and SOFA scores in evaluating the prognoses of patients with sepsis, few have examined how they changed over time. Therefore, this study aimed to investigate the time course of SIC and SOFA scores and their association  with  outcomes  in  patients  with  sepsis.  The changes  in  coagulation  function  and  organ  dysfunction may be more pronounced in the early stages of the disease, so we planned to evaluate the SIC and SOFA scores on days 1, 2, and 4 [15].

## Methods

## Study design and population

This was a single-center, prospective, observational study.  Patients  with  sepsis  admitted  to  the  emergency department  of  the  China  Rehabilitation  Research  Center (Beijing, China), a university-affiliated tertiary hospital,  between  December  2018  and  November  2021  were included in this study. The exclusion criteria were as follows:  age &lt; 18  years;  pregnancy;  history  of  hematopoietic  malignancy; history of serious liver disease; history of  thrombocytopenia  and  coagulopathy;  and  treatment with  radiotherapy,  chemotherapy,  or  warfarin.  Patients with  incomplete  SIC  assessment  data  and  those  who died  within  24  h  of  admission  were  also  excluded  after enrollment. The Institutional Review Board of the China Rehabilitation  Research  Center  (2018-061-1)  approved this  study.  All  participants  or  their  legal  representatives signed  an  informed  consent  form,  and  this  study  was conducted following the Declaration of Helsinki.

## Data collection

The demographic data and clinical characteristics of the participants, including age, sex, body mass index (BMI), and comorbidities, were collected upon admission. Additionally, routine laboratory test results and Acute Physiology  and  Chronic  Health  Evaluation  II  (APACHE  II) scores were evaluated and recorded 24 h after admission. The most abnormal result was recorded if multiple results were  available  within  the  first  24  h.  The  SOFA  scores, platelet counts and prothrombin time-international normalized  ratios  (PT-INRs)  were  evaluated  on  days  1, 2,  and  4.  Platelet  counts  were  measured using the Mindray BC-5390 automated hematology analyzer (Mindray, Shenzhen, China), and PT-INRs were determined using the  Sysmex  CA-7000  automated  coagulation  analyzer (Sysmex, Chuo-ku, Japan). All patients received standard treatment strategies according to the instructions of the Surviving Sepsis Campaign Guideline [26]. The primary outcome was 28-day mortality, and all participants were categorized into either survivor or non-survivor groups.

## Definitions

Sepsis was defined as an increase in the SOFA score of at least two points caused by current infection, according to the Sepsis-3 definition [1]. Septic shock was defined as fluid-resistant  hypotension  (mean  arterial  pressure  less than 65 mmHg) requiring vasopressors with a serum lactate level &gt; 2 mmol/L [1]. SIC was diagnosed according to the  criteria  proposed  by  members  of  the  ISTH  in  2017 [13].  The  SIC  scoring  system  comprises  the  following three  factors:  PT-INR,  platelet  count,  and  SOFA  score (composed  of  respiratory,  cardiovascular,  hepatic,  and renal  SOFA).  The  maximum total  score  was  six;  a  total score of four or more was defined as SIC (Table 1) [13].

A  total  score  of  four  or  more  is  defined  as  SIC.  The total  SOFA  score  is  the  sum  of  the  four  items  (respiratory,  cardiovascular,  hepatic,  and  renal  SOFA).  PT-INR: prothrombin time-international, SOFA: sequential organ failure assessment.

## Statistical analysis

Normally distributed variables are expressed as means ± standard  deviation,  and  Student's t -tests  were used  to  compare  differences  between  groups.  Nonnormally  distributed  variables  are  expressed  as  median with  interquartile  range,  and  Mann-Whitney U tests were used for comparisons between groups. Qualitative data  are  presented  as  counts  and  percentages,  and  chisquare tests were used for difference comparisons. Expectation-maximization algorithm was used to impute the  quantitative  variables  if  missing  data  were  less  than 20%, while there were no qualitative variables with missing  data  in  the  current  study.  A  generalized  estimating equation  analysis  (with  autocorrelation  as  the  working correlation  matrix)  was  conducted  to  evaluate  the  differences between SIC scores at various time points, the differences  between  SIC  scores  in  the  two  groups,  and the  interaction  effect  between  groups  and  various  time points.  If  the  interaction  effect  was  statistically  significant,  a  simple-effect  analysis  was  performed.  The  trend of  changes  in  SOFA  scores  in  different  groups  was  also analyzed using the same method. We plotted the receiver operating  characteristic  (ROC)  curves  and  calculated the  area  under  the  ROC  curve  (AUC)  to  evaluate  the predictive value of SIC scores and SOFA scores at various time points for the prognosis of sepsis. Introducing those variables related to 28-day mortality in the univariable analysis, forward stepwise multivariate Cox proportional  hazards  analyses  were  performed  to  determine the  factors  independently  associated  with  the  28-day survival of patients with sepsis. Therefore, patients were determined to have SIC based on the SIC scores on days 2 and 4. The variables that were introduced in Model 1 were  age,  D-dimer,  albumin,  and  lactate  levels,  SOFA score,  APACHE  II  score,  septic  shock,  and  SIC  on  day 2.  The  variables  that  were  introduced  in  Model  2  were age,  D-dimer,  albumin,  and  lactate  levels,  SOFA  score, APACHE II score, septic shock, and SIC on day 4. A twosided P &lt; 0.05 was  considered  statistically significant. SPSS (version  26.0;  IBM,  Armonk,  NY,  USA),  MedCalc (version  19.3;  MedCalc  Software  Ltd,  Ostend,  Belgium) and  GraphPad  Prism  (version  9.4;  GraphPad  Software, San Diego, CA, USA) were used to perform the analyses and draw the figures.

Table 1 The sepsis-induced coagulopathy scoring system

| Category    | Parameter                 | 0 point   | 1 point   | 2 points   |
|-------------|---------------------------|-----------|-----------|------------|
| Prothrombin | PT-INR                    | ≤ 1.2     | > 1.2     | > 1.4      |
| Coagulation | Platelet count (×10 9 /L) | ≥ 150     | <150      | <100       |
| Total SOFA  | SOFA four items           | 0         | 1         | ≥ 2        |

## Results

## Patient characteristics

In  this  study,  225  consecutive  patients  with  sepsis  were enrolled,  of  whom  two  with  incomplete  data  and  14 who died within 24 h of admission were excluded. Ultimately,  209  participants  were  included  in  the  analysis. The median age of the patients was 83 years (74, 88), and 60.3%  (126/209)  were  male.  The  28-day  mortality  rate was  37.3%  (78/209).  The  main  infected  sites  were  the lungs  (78.9%),  urinary  tract  (24.4%),  abdomen  (22.0%), and soft tissues (5.3%).

Table  2  presents  the  baseline  clinical  characteristics and laboratory data of the study participants. The nonsurvivors were older and had more patients with septic shock  than  the  survivors.  No  significant  differences  in sex, BMIs, comorbidities, or sites of infection were found