## ORIGINAL ARTICLE

<!-- image -->

## Predictive factors of mortality in open abdomen for abdominal sepsis: a retrospective cohort study on 113 patients

Dario Tartaglia 1 · Jacopo Nicolò Marin 1 · Alice Maria Nicoli 1 · Andrea De Palma 1 · Martina Picchi 1 · Serena Musetti 1 · Camilla Cremonini 1 · Stefano Salvadori 2 · Federico Coccolini 1 · Massimo Chiarugi 1

Received: 26 October 2020 / Accepted: 22 February 2021 / Published online: 8 March 2021 © The Author(s) 2021

## Abstract

Over the past few years, the open abdomen (OA) as a part of Damage Control Surgery (DCS) has been introduced as a surgical strategy with the intent to reduce the mortality of patients with severe abdominal sepsis. Aims of our study were to analyze the OA effects on patients with abdominal sepsis and identify predictive factors of mortality. Patients admitted to our institution with abdominal sepsis requiring OA from 2010 to 2019 were retrospectively analyzed. Primary outcomes were mortality, morbidity and definitive fascial closure (DFC). Comparison between groups was made via univariate and multivariate analyses. On 1474 patients operated for abdominal sepsis, 113 (7.6%) underwent OA. Male gender accounted for 52.2% of cases. Mean age was 68.1 ± 14.3 years. ASA score was &gt; 2 in 87.9%. Mean BMI, APACHE II score and Mannheim Peritonitis Index were 26.4 ± 4.9, 15.3 ± 6.3, and 22.6 ± 7.3, respectively. A negative pressure wound system technique was used in 47% of the cases. Overall, mortality was 43.4%, morbidity 76.6%, and DFC rate was 97.8%. Entero-atmospheric fistula rate was 2.2%. At multivariate analysis, APACHE II score (OR 1.18; 95% CI 1.05-1.32; p =  0.005), Frailty Clinical Scale (OR 4.66; 95% CI 3.19-6.12; p &lt;  0.0001) and ASA grade IV (OR 7.86; 95% CI 2.18-28.27; p =  0.002) were significantly associated with mortality. OA seems to be a safe and reliable treatment for critically ill patients with severe abdominal sepsis. Nonetheless, in these patients, co-morbidity and organ failure remain the major obstacles to a better prognosis.

Keywords Open abdomen · Abdominal sepsis · Mortality · Negative pressure · Morbidity · Damage control

## Background

A wide range of pathological conditions could be related to abdominal sepsis such as generalized primary or secondary peritonitis, massive intestinal infarction and severe acute pancreatitis complicated by infected necrosis. In the context of damage control surgery (DCS), open abdomen (OA) is indicated in case of septic shock, inability to control the source of infection, the need for a deferred intestinal anastomosis, loss of abdominal wall and important visceral edema leading to abdominal compartment syndrome (ACS) [1] . There is no certainty on whether and when to choose OA instead of primary closure at first laparotomy with ondemand relaparotomy, even though the use of OA is increasing worldwide [2]. OA could potentially be associated with several critical complications, that can lead to a high rate of mortality in such very frail category of patients. However, the improvement of different types of temporary abdominal closure technique and a better comprehension of the pathophysiology of the OA have led to a dramatic reduction of specific complications like entero-atmospheric fistulas [3] . Only few observational, small cohort and non-comparative studies focused on the OA in septic patients without chasing significant conclusions. Moreover, little is in the literature focusing on the research of predictive parameters of mortality which might help surgeons to adequately select patients and choose between different therapeutic strategies. The present study aimed to evaluate postoperative outcomes of patients with abdominal sepsis treated with OA mainly in terms of perioperative mortality, overall morbidity and definitive fascial closure rates and to identify potential predictive factors of perioperative mortality.

* Dario Tartaglia dario.tartaglia@unipi.it

1 Emergency Surgery Department and Trauma Center, University of Pisa, New Santa Chiara Hospital, Via Paradisa 2, 56124 Pisa, Italy

2 Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche Area della Ricerca di Pisa, Pisa, Toscana, Italy

<!-- image -->

## Methods

## Patients and setting

All patients undergoing OA with a diagnosis of abdominal sepsis (i.e., secondary or tertiary generalized peritonitis due to intestinal perforation, intestinal infarction, necrotizing infected acute severe pancreatitis, multiple abdominal abscesses) and/or septic shock in a single academic center from 2010 to 2019 were reviewed. The institutional review board approved the study design. This research complied with Ethical Standards and informed consent was obtained in all patients. Septic shock was defined according to the 3rd International Consensus Definitions for Sepsis and Septic Shock [4]. OA was adopted in case of septic shock due to abdominal peritonitis. In case of absence of shock, the decision to perform OA was taken according to the presence of massive grade of peritoneal contamination, patients' severe comorbidities and fast deterioration of clinical conditions, which might not have allowed patient to sustain a prolonged operative duration.

## Surgical technique

Temporary abdominal closure (TAC) techniques used in this study included Negative Pressure Wound Therapy with commercial kits (NPWT), Vacuum-pack technique as described by Barker et al. [5], and Skin-closure technique. A mesh mediated NPWT was accomplished from the second revision with persistence of OA indication, or at the index laparotomy in case of patients who already had recent several surgical operations. In that case, after the intra-abdominal fenestrated plastic visceral protective layer was set in place, a 30 × 30 cm polypropylene mesh was sutured to fascial edges with a running nonabsorbable monofilament suture before setting perforated foam and adhesive drapes. At the following look, the mesh was divided along the main axis in two halves, the visceral drape pulled out, and the peritoneal cavity carefully evaluated. In case of definitive closure, the mesh was removed after removing the running nonabsorbable suture in the fascial edges on each side; otherwise, the two halves of the mesh were stretched to bring near the fascial edges as much as possible and then joined with a median running nonabsorbable suture [6]. The decision to close the wall or to continue OA at the second look was left to the attending surgeon, on the basis of an exhaustive control of the infectious source, patient's substantial clinical improvement, and vitality of the abdominal organs. Successful definitive fascial closure was defined as complete closure of the whole length of the incised fascia.

<!-- image -->

## Patient data and follow-up

Data collected for each patient included gender, age, Body Mass Index, comorbidities, clinical and prognostic scores such as American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) score, Charlson Age-Comorbidity (CaCI) Index, Acute Physiology And Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II), time to surgery (in hours), Frailty Clinical Scale, and Mannheim Peritonitis Index (MPI). OA indications, TAC techniques, number of looks, modified Björck classification at second look (Fig. 1) [7], definitive fascial closure and cutaneous closure, use of a prosthetic mesh, in-hospital overall morbidity, ICU length of stay (LOT), 30-day reintervention rate, and in-hospital mortality were also collected and analyzed. All patients included in this study were followed up for 1 year from hospital discharge. Follow-up evaluation included outpatient clinic visits and/or phone interviews.

## Statistical analysis

Categorical variables were presented as numbers and percentages, whereas continuous variables as mean ± standard deviation if uniformly distributed, and median and interquartile range (IQR) if not uniformly distributed. Association analysis between mortality and variables potentially affecting outcome (gender, age, BMI, CaCI index, comorbidities, ASA score, MPI, APACHE II, time to surgery, Frailty Clinical Scale, TAC technique, modified Björck grade at second look, number of surgical looks, OA duration, ICU LOS) was carried out. Continuous variables were compared with Student t test for independent variables, both homoscedastic and heteroscedastic version, and Mann-Whitney U test, as appropriate. Normality of distributions were assessed through Shapiro-Wilk test. Categorical variables were compared by Chi-squared test. Comparison between mortality during OA and after DFC was carried out with a two-sample proportion z test. A multivariate analysis was carried out with a binary logistic regression model in stepwise backward mode. Significance level was set at p &lt;  0.05 both at univariate and multivariate analysis. All statistics were processed by SPSS software 24.0 version   (IBM ® ).

Fig. 1 Amended Björck classification of open abdomen [7]

## Results

On 1474 patients operated for severe abdominal sepsis, 113 patients (7.6%) were analyzed. Fifty-nine patients (52.2%) were male. Mean age was 68.1 ± 14.3 years and mean BMI resulted 26.4  ±  4.9 kg/m 2 (Table 1). Comorbidities were present in 96.1% of patients and were mainly represented by

Table 1 Population characteristics

| Patients                                | N = 113   |
|-----------------------------------------|-----------|
| Male gender, n (%)                      | 59 (52.2) |
| Age, mean±SD                            | 68.1±14.3 |
| BMI, mean±SD                            | 26.4±4.9  |
| Charlson age-comorbidity index, mean±SD | 4.5±2.3   |
| Comorbidities, n (%)                    |           |
| Hypertension                            | 39 (38.2) |
| Cancer and/or chemotherapy              | 30 (29.4) |
| Cardiopathy/cardiomyopathy              | 21 (20.6) |
| Diabetes                                | 15 (14.7) |
| Pneumological disorders                 | 18 (17.6) |
| Obesity                                 | 12 (11.8) |
| Immunological disorders                 | 11 (10.8) |
| Neurological disorders                  | 10 (9.8)  |
| Hepatopathy                             | 8 (7.8)   |
| Nephropathy                             | 7 (6.9)   |
| Smoking                                 | 4 (3.9)   |
| Malnutrition                            | 3 (2.9)   |
| Immunosuppression/steroid use           | 3 (2.9)   |
| Aneurism                                | 3 (2.9)   |
| Presence of ostomy                      | 4 (3.9)   |
| None                                    | 4 (3.9)   |
| Other                                   | 46 (45.1) |
| ASA, n (%) a                            |           |
| I                                       | 1 (1.0)   |
| II                                      | 11 (11.1) |
| III                                     | 37 (37.4) |
| IV                                      | 50 (50.5) |
| Mannheim peritonitis index, mean±SD     | 22.6±7.3  |
| APACHE II score, mean±SD                | 15.3±6.3  |
| Time to surgery (hours), mean±SD        | 9.2±6.7   |
| Frailty clinical scale, median (IQR)    | 7 (1-9)   |

BMI body  mass  index, ASA American  society  of  Anesthesiology score, APACHE II acute physiology and chronic health evaluation II score, SD standard deviation, IQR interquartile range arterial hypertension in 38.2% of cases, cancer in 29.4%, cardiac disease in 20.6%, pulmonary disease in 17.6%, diabetes mellitus in 10.7% and immune disorders in 10.8%. Mean CaCI score was 4.5 ± 2.3. An ASA score = IV was reported in 50.5% of cases. Mean MPI was 22.6 ± 7.3 and mean APACHE II was 15.3 ± 6.3. Mean time to surgery was 9.2 ± 6.7 h. Median Frailty Clinical Scale was 7 (IQR 1-9).

a Based on 99 pts with available ASA score data

Seventy-one (62.8%) patients presented with a bowel perforation, 29 (25.7%) bowel infarction, 10 (8.8%) multiple abdominal abscesses and 3 (2.7%) an infected necrotizing acute severe pancreatitis.

In this study, 46.9% of cases were treated with NPWT technique, 33.6% with Vacuum-pack technique, 15.9% with skin-closure, and 3.5% with mesh-mediated NPWT since the first look (Table 2). Mean OA duration was 2.8 ± 1.7 days, with a mean number of looks of 1.2  ±  0.8. The distribution of the modified Björck classification at the   2 nd look is described in the Fig. 2: 49% of cases presented a 1A grade.

Morbidity  occurred  in  76.6%  of  cases.  The  overall mortality was 43.4% (Table 3). Twenty patients (40.8%) deceased during OA treatment, while 29 (59.2%) deceased during the first 30 days from the definitive fascial closure ( p =  0.02). The causes of death were cardiopulmonary complications (55%), multiorgan failure due to sepsis (41%), and irreversible brain damage (4%) (Table 3). There was no mortality between 30 and 90 days. Among OA surviving patients, 97.8% of cases reached definitive fascial closure. Ten patients (10.8%) required a prosthetic mesh (absorbable polyglactin 910 mesh: suprafascial in 5 and intraperitoneal in 3 cases; polypropylene retromuscular mesh in 1 case, and bioabsorbable intraperitoneal mesh together with polypropylene suprafascial mesh in 1 case). In 94.6% of cases, the skin was contextually closed.

Table 2 Perioperative variables during OA treatment

| TAC technique adopted at first look, n (%)   |           |
|----------------------------------------------|-----------|
| NPWT with commercial kits                    | 53 (46.9) |
| Vacuum-pack technique                        | 38 (33.6) |
| Skin-closure                                 | 18 (15.9) |
| Mesh-mediated NPWT                           | 4 (3.5)   |
| OA* duration, mean±SD                        | 2.8±1.7   |
| Number of looks, mean±SD                     | 1.2±0.8   |
| ICU length of stay, mean±SD                  | 13.7±12.8 |
| Type of nutrition, n (%)                     |           |
| Parenteral                                   | 96 (95.0) |
| Enteral                                      | 2 (2.0)   |
| Enteral+parenteral                           | 3 (3.0)   |

TAC temporary  abdominal  closure, NPWT negative  pressure  wound technique, OA open  abdomen, ICU intensive  care  unit, SD standard deviation

<!-- image -->