<!-- image -->

## Edited by:

Marcelo Arruda Nakazone, Faculty of Medicine of São José do Rio Preto, Brazil

## Reviewed by:

Massimo Girardis, University Hospital of Modena, Italy Chun-Ta Huang, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taiwan

## *Correspondence:

Yan He

yanhe1220@126.com Xiuming Xi xixiuming2937@sina.com

† These authors have contributed equally to this work

## Specialty section:

This article was submitted to Intensive Care Medicine and Anesthesiology, a section of the journal

Frontiers in Medicine

Received:

11 August 2020

Accepted:

16 November 2020

Published:

17 December 2020

## Citation:

Wang M, Jiang L, Zhu B, Li W, Du B, Kang Y, Weng L, Qin T, Ma X, Zhu D, Wang Y, Zhan Q, Duan M, Li W, Sun B, Cao X, Ai Y, Li T, Zhu X, Jia J, Zhou J, He Y, Xi X and China Critical Care Sepsis Trial (CCCST) workgroup (2020) The Prevalence, Risk Factors, and Outcomes of Sepsis in Critically Ill Patients in China: A Multicenter Prospective Cohort Study. Front. Med. 7:593808.

[doi: 10.3389/fmed.2020.593808](https://doi.org/10.3389/fmed.2020.593808)

<!-- image -->

## [The Prevalence, Risk Factors, and Outcomes of Sepsis in Critically Ill Patients in China: A Multicenter Prospective Cohort Study](https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fmed.2020.593808/full)

Meiping Wang 1,2† , Li Jiang 3† , Bo Zhu 2† , Wen Li 2 , Bin Du 4 , Yan Kang 5 , Li Weng 4 , Tiehe Qin 6 , Xiaochun Ma 7 , Duming Zhu 8 , Yushan Wang 9 , Qingyuan Zhan 10 , Meili Duan 11 , Wenxiong Li 12 , Bing Sun 13 , Xiangyuan Cao 14 , Yuhang Ai 15 , Tong Li 16 , Xi Zhu 17 , Jianguo Jia 18 , Jianxin Zhou 19 , Yan He 1 *, Xiuming Xi 2 * and China Critical Care Sepsis Trial (CCCST) workgroup

1 Department of Epidemiology and Health Statistics, School of Public Health, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 2 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Fuxing Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 3 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 4 Medical Intensive Care Unit, Peking Union Medical College Hospital, Beijing, China, 5 Department of Critical Care Medicine, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China, 6 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Guangdong Geriatric Institute, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangdong, China, 7 Department of Critical Care Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University, Shenyang, China, 8 Surgical Intensive Care Unit, Department of Anaesthesiology, ZhongShan Hospital, FuDan University, Shanghai, China, 9 Intensive Care Unit, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, China, 10 Department of Critical Care Medicine, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China, 11 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 12 Surgical Intensive Care Unit, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 13 Department of Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Institute of Respiratory Medicine, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 14 Department of Critical Care Medicine, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Ningxia, China, 15 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, China, 16 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Tongren Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 17 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Peking University Third Hospital, Beijing, China, 18 Surgical Intensive Care Unit, Xuanwu Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China, 19 Department of Critical Care Medicine, Beijing Tiantan Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China

Background: Sepsis is a main cause of morbidity and mortality in critically ill patients. The epidemiology of sepsis in high-income countries is well-known, but information on sepsis in middleor low-income countries is still deficient, especially in China. The purpose of this study was to explore the prevalence, characteristics, risk factors, treatment, and outcomes of sepsis in critically ill patients in tertiary hospitals in China.

Methods: A multicenter prospective observational cohort study was performed with consecutively collected data from adults who stayed in any intensive care unit (ICU) for at least 24 h; data were collected from 1 January 2014 to 31 August 2015, and patients were followed until death or discharge from the hospital.

Results: A total of 4,910 patients were enrolled in the study. Of these, 2,086 (42.5%) presented with sepsis or septic shock on admission to the ICU or within the first 48 h after admission to the ICU. ICU mortality was higher in patients with sepsis (13.1%) and septic shock (39.0%) and varied according to geographical region. Acinetobacter, Pseudomonas, and Staphylococcus infections were associated with increased ICU mortality. In addition, age, Acute Physiology, and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) scores, pre-existing cardiovascular diseases, malignant tumors, renal replacement

## INTRODUCTION

Sepsis is a major challenge for public health; it is the main cause of morbidity and mortality in intensive care units (ICUs) and is associated with poor outcomes (1-4). In the United States, the incidence of sepsis is 535 cases per 100,000 person-years and is increasing (5). A meta-analysis of data from high-income countries predicted that 31.5 million sepsis and 19.4 million severe sepsis cases will occur annually worldwide (6). Recently, global data from the Intensive Care Over Nations (ICON) audit showed that 29.5% of patients had sepsis during their ICU stay, and the occurrence rates varied regionally from 13.6 to 39.3% (7).

Although several studies have shown that mortality due to sepsis has declined in the past two decades due to advanced supportive care and the introduction of guidelines, the exact mortality rate is still controversial (8-10). In the United States, mortality due to sepsis decreased from 27.8 to 17.9% between 1979 and 2000 (8). Similarly, in Australia and New Zealand, mortality decreased by almost half (from 35.0 to 18.4%) between 2000 and 2012 (9). However, a multicenter study showed that the in-hospital mortality rate in patients with septic shock was 50.9% in Germany and 58.6% in Italy (10, 11).

To date, there have been few large epidemiological investigations of sepsis in middle- and low-income countries. The ICON audit indicated that low income was associated with increased mortality (12). A multicenter point-prevalence study in Turkey showed that the prevalence of sepsis was 30.8%, with a 75.9% mortality rate in patients with septic shock (13). China is a middle-income country that accounts for one-fifth of the world's population. Information on the epidemiology of sepsis has thus far been limited to particular populations (14-16) or obtained with a cross-sectional study (17), which may not accurately reflect the epidemiology of sepsis in critically ill patients.

The aim of this prospective multicenter observational cohort study, which was conducted by the China Critical Care

Abbreviations: ICU, intensive care unit; APACHE II, Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II; RRT, renal replacement therapy; OR, odds ratio; ICON, Intensive Care Over Nations; SOFA, Sequential Organ Failure Assessment; MV, mechanical ventilation; SCr, serum creatinine; PaO2, arterial partial oxygen pressure; FiO2, fraction of inspired oxygen; SSC, Surviving Sepsis Campaign; AKI, acute kidney injury; ARDS, acute respiratory distress syndrome; SD, standard deviation; IQR, interquartile range; CI, confidence interval; SOAP , Sepsis Occurrence in Acutely Ill Patients; ICD, International Classification of Diseases; CRF, case report form; GCS, Glasgow coma scale.

therapy (RRT), and septic shock were independent risk factors for mortality in patients with sepsis. The prompt administration of antibiotics (OR 0.65, 95% CI 0.46-0.92) and 30 mL/kg of initial fluid resuscitation during the first 3 h (OR 0.43, 95% CI 0.30-0.63) improved the outcome in patients with septic shock.

Conclusions: Sepsis was common and was associated with a high mortality rate in critically ill patients in tertiary hospitals in China. The prompt administration of antibiotics and 30 mL/kg fluid resuscitation decreased the risk of mortality.

Keywords: sepsis, septic shock, mortality, prevalance, risk factor

Sepsis Trial (CCCST) group, was to explore the prevalence, characteristics, risk factors, treatment, and outcomes of sepsis in critically ill patients in tertiary hospitals in China.

## METHODS

## Study Design

The CCCST was a prospective multicenter observational cohort study designed to assess the prevalence, characteristics, risk factors, and shortand long-term outcomes in critically ill patients in 18 ICUs in 16 tertiary hospitals in 7 geographical regions from 1 January 2014 to 31 August 2015. Eligible patients who were admitted consecutively to ICUs were aged 18 years or older and stayed in the ICU for at least 24 h. If the patients were admitted to the ICU repeatedly during the same hospitalization event, only the first admission was considered.

## Data Collection

The following variables were extracted from the CCCST dataset: baseline demographic data (age, sex, height, and weight), source and type of admission, main diagnosis, and comorbid conditions. The severity of illness was represented by the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II (APACHE II) score (18) and the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score (19), which were calculated based on clinical and laboratory values. The APACHE II score was calculated within 24 h of admission to the ICU. The SOFA score was recorded consecutively for 7 days after admission to the ICU, and each component of the SOFA score was evaluated at the onset of sepsis. The use of mechanical ventilation (MV), the use of vasopressors (including dopamine, epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dobutamine), the serum creatinine (SCr) level, and urine output were also continuously recorded for 7 days or until discharge. Other clinical variables, such as blood pressure, arterial partial oxygen pressure (PaO2), fraction of inspired oxygen (FiO2), nutritional therapy, and renal replacement therapy (RRT), were recorded.

The occurrence, severity, and diagnosis of sepsis were assessed consecutively for 28 days or until discharge. The sites and types of infection, biological samples, and culture results were also recorded. The interval between the first use of targeted antibiotics and the onset of sepsis or septic shock, other antibiotics administered before sepsis and retained pre-sepsis blood cultures were also recorded. The primary outcome was ICU mortality and in-hospital mortality; the lengths of ICU and hospital stays were secondary outcomes.

## Definitions

According to the 'Surviving Sepsis Campaign (SSC): International Guidelines for the Management of Sepsis and Septic Shock: 2016' (20), sepsis was defined as life-threatening organ failure (an acute change in the SOFA score ≥ 2 points) caused by infection on admission to the ICU or within the first 48 h after admission to the ICU. Septic shock was defined as sepsis associated with hypotension that required the administration of vasopressors to maintain a mean arterial pressure &gt; 65 mmHg and a serum lactate level &gt; 2 mmol/L, despite adequate fluid resuscitation. Community-acquired sepsis was defined as sepsis that was present on admission or that developed within 48 h after hospital admission. Hospital-acquired sepsis was defined as sepsis that developed &gt; 48 h after hospital admission. For patients with multiple episodes of sepsis, only the first episode was recorded. Acute kidney injury (AKI) and severity were categorized according to the Kidney Disease: Improving Global Outcomes (KDIGO) guidelines (21). Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) was defined as a PaO2/FIO2 ratio &lt; 300 mmHg, according to the Berlin definition (22). According to the International Sepsis Forum Consensus Conference on the Definitions of Infection in the Intensive Care Unit, catheterrelated sepsis was defined as at least one positive peripheral blood culture with (1) the same microorganism (the same species with the same sensitivities) isolated from the catheter segment or the periphery; (2) the same microorganism isolated from the peripheral blood; or (3) the same organism identified in paired central and peripheral blood cultures, wherein the central blood culture was positive ≥ 2 h earlier than the peripheral blood culture (23). An unscheduled operation without sufficient preparation within 24 h of the onset of injury was defined as emergency surgery. However, elective surgery was performed after adequate preoperative preparation.

## Statistical Analysis

Continuous variables are presented as the means ± standard deviations (SDs) or medians [interquartile ranges (IQRs)], and categorical variables are presented as percentages. Differences between the groups were compared with the t -test, one-way analysis of variance or Wilcoxon rank-sum test for continuous variables and the chi-squared test for categorical variables. Multivariable stepwise logistic regression analysis was used to explore the risk factors for ICU mortality in patients with sepsis or septic shock. Variables with a p &lt; 0.2 in the univariate analysis were entered into the multivariable logistic regression analysis. In the multivariable analysis, the centers were included as a random effect. Odds ratios (ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were calculated by logistic regression analysis. A two-sided p &lt; 0.05 was considered statistically significant. All analyses were performed with IBM SPSS statistical software version 25.0 for Windows (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA) and R version 3.6.1 (http:// www.r-project.org).

## RESULTS

## Characteristics of the Participants

Atotal of 14,604 critically ill patients were consecutively admitted to the ICUs. A total of 4,910 patients were included in the CCCST. Of those, 2,086 (42.5%) had sepsis, including 1,134 (54.4%) with septic shock ( Figure 1 ). Among all the participants, 3,009 (61.3%) patients had at least one episode of acute organ dysfunction. Patients with sepsis were more likely to be male (65.3 vs. 62.5%), have higher APACHE II (19.0 vs. 13.0) and SOFA (8.0 vs. 6.0) scores, have more comorbid conditions (no comorbidities, 25.1 vs. 38.5%) and organ dysfunction (no organ dysfunction, 22.2 vs. 50.9%), require more MV (77.4 vs. 64.2%) and RRT (18.3 vs. 11.6%), have a longer length of ICU stay (days, 8.0 vs. 4.0) and have higher ICU (27.2 vs. 9.5%) and in-hospital (33.0 vs. 13.1%) mortality rates than those who did not develop sepsis ( Table 1 ). When sepsis was redefined based on the Sepsis-1 definition (see Supplementary Table 1 ), 200 (4.1%) non-sepsis patients met the definition. The characteristics and outcomes are shown in Supplementary Table 2 .

## Distribution of Sites and Isolated Organisms

The most common site of infection in patients with sepsis was the lungs (55.5%), followed by the abdomen (24.4%). Microorganism culture was performed in 1,843 (88.4%) patients, and 1,275 (61.1%) had one or more positive cultures ( Table 2 ). Among the patients with positive isolates, 407 (31.9%) were infected by gram-positive organisms, and 949 (74.4%) were infected by gram-negative organisms. Acinetobacter (29.0%) was the most common gram-negative organism and was usually isolated from the lungs (37.3%), pleura (42.9%), bloodstream (29.7%), catheter-related locations (42.9%), and central nervous system (CNS) (50.0%). Staphylococcus (18.2%) was the most common gram-positive organism and was usually isolated from patients with wound/soft tissue infections (26.8%) ( Table 2 , Supplementary Table 3 ). Patients with hospital-acquired sepsis were more likely to have positive cultures of Acinetobacter (34.2 vs. 25.2%) and Pseudomonas (25.1 vs. 19.8). In the patients with septic shock, Pseudomonas (24.1 vs. 19.3%) and Candida (21.8 vs. 19.3%) isolates were likely to be present; Klebsiella isolates were less common than Pseudomonas and Candida (8.9 vs. 15.1%) isolates ( Table 2 ). The microorganism species were significantly different according to region (see Supplementary Table 4 ).

## Organ Dysfunction and Elements of Sepsis

Among all patients with sepsis, approximately three-fourths (74.4%) had been given antibiotics before the onset of sepsis, and 63.2% retained bacteria in their blood culture. Patients with hospital-acquired sepsis were more likely to have higher subSOFA scores in any organ (except the kidneys and CNS) and more likely to have AKI (45.1 vs. 39.1%) but less likely to have ARDS (37.3 vs. 49.4%) than those with community-acquired sepsis. The patients with hospital-acquired sepsis commonly received more antibiotics pre-ICU (79.8 vs. 70.4%), antibiotics within 1 h after the recognition of sepsis (76.5 vs. 53.6%) and enteral nutritional therapy (61.8 vs. 52.3%) ( Table 3 ).