## RESEARCH ARTICLE

## Open Access

## A risk score based on pediatric sequential organ failure assessment predicts 90-day mortality in children with Klebsiella pneumoniae bloodstream infection

<!-- image -->

Shuang Li 1 † , Jingxian Liu 2 † , Feng Chen 2 , Kang Cai 1 , Jintong Tan 3 , Wei Xie 4 , Rong Qian 5 , Xiaoqin Liu 6 , Wenhong Zhang 7 , Huimin Du 1* , Ying Liu 2* and Lisu Huang 1*

## Abstract

Background: Klebsiella pneumoniae bloodstream infection (Kp-BSI) is a serious threat to pediatric patients. The objective of this study was to explore the risk factors, validate the prediction efficiency of pediatric Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) and establish better early predictors of mortality in pediatric patients with Kp-BSI.

Methods: All children diagnosed with Kp-BSI were included in this retrospective cohort study from January 2009 to June 2019. Basic characteristics, symptoms and physical examinations, treatments, laboratory statistics, and SOFA at the onset of Kp-BSI were recorded. The Cox proportional hazard model and receiver operating characteristic curves were used to assess the association between the variables and the 90-day mortality and their predictive value. DeLong ' s test of receiver operating characteristic curves and integrated discrimination improvement index were used to determine the improvement in predictive capacity of the modified SOFA models. A predictive score was developed using multivariate logistic regression.

Results: Of the 146 children enrolled, 33 (22.6%) patients died within 90 days. Hospitalization in the last 6 months, intra-abdominal source of infection, presence of organ failure, and altered levels of blood biomarkers, including Creactive protein, albumin, and lactate were significant risk factors for 90-day mortality. The area under the curve (AUC) of SOFA for predicting 90-day mortality was 0.80 (95% CI 0.71 -0.89). Moreover, we found that a prediction model combining SOFA with two other parameters, namely hospitalization in the last 6 months and intraabdominal source of infection, was better at predicting mortality (AUC = 0.89, 95% CI 0.82 -0.96; sensitivity = 0.86; specificity = 0.84). According to this novel risk model, we defined three statistically different groups: low-risk, (Continued on next page)

* Correspondence: donghuimin@xinhuamed.com.cn; liuying01@xinhuamed.com.cn; huanglisu@xinhuamed.com.cn

Shuang Li and Jingxian Liu contributed equally to this work. 1 Department of Infectious Diseases, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, No. 1665, Kongjiang Road, Yangpu District, Shanghai 200092, China

†

2 Division of Medical Microbiology, Department of Clinical Laboratory, Xinhua Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, No. 1665, Kongjiang Road, Yangpu District, Shanghai 200092, China Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

<!-- image -->

© The Author(s). 2020 Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/. The Creative Commons Public Domain Dedication waiver (http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) applies to the data made available in this article, unless otherwise stated in a credit line to the data.

<!-- image -->

(Continued from previous page)

medium-risk and high-risk groups, with an observed 90-day mortality of 5.4, 35.7, and 72.0%, respectively. With reference to the low-risk patients, the medium-risk and high-risk groups had a higher mortality, with hazard ratios of 8.36 (95% CI 3.60 -27.83) and 20.27 (95% CI 7.47 -54.95), respectively.

Conclusions: The modified SOFA may be better than the original score to predict 90-day mortality in pediatric patients with Kp-BSI. Future prospective studies are required to validate this novel scoring system in external cohorts.

Keywords: Klebsiella pneumoniae , Children, Mortality, Risk score

## Background

Infections caused by Enterobacteriaceae , especially the carbapenem-resistant Enterobacteriaceae , which can cost up to $66,031 per patient for hospital treatments in the US [1], are currently considered an urgent threat to global public health. Klebsiella pneumoniae ( K. pneumoniae ), a member of the family Enterobacteriaceae , is an opportunistic pathogen mainly associated with nosocomial infections [2]. In addition to the increased healthcare expenditure, K. pneumoniae is associated with high mortality and prolonged hospital stays [3]. Compared with the overall mortality owing to pneumonia (0.65%) [4], the mortality caused by K. pneumoniae bloodstream infection (Kp-BSI) in young children is even higher, ranging from 12.3 to 26.6% in individual institutions [5, 6]. Notably, bloodstream infections by K. pneumoniae are more deadly than any other type of infection caused by this species of bacteria [7]. For this reason, instruments with high sensitivity and specificity for early prediction of survival may aid in the timely initiation of treatments and improve the outcome of patients with Kp-BSI.

There have been several studies focused on the early prediction of mortality in children with Kp-BSI. It was reported that intensive care admission, severity of comorbidities, and carbapenem resistance may be independent predictors [5, 6, 8]. The mortality rate in patients with bloodstream infections due to carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae (CR-Kp) was found to be eight times higher than in those infected with carbapenem-susceptible strains [6]; in other studies, however, the results were inconsistent [5, 9]. Additionally, the clinical history, symptoms, and physical examinations were often ignored in these studies. Critical values of acute-phase reactants typically associated with infections, including the C-reactive protein and procalcitonin, are also used to predict mortality of patients with general sepsis, with a moderate predictive power [10]. However, the predictive capacity of these biomarkers in patients with Kp-BSI remains unknown. As Kp-BSI frequently leads to sepsis, the Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) score is accepted as an indicator of mortality in patients with Kp-BSI [11]. However, few studies have validated the sensitivity and specificity of the SOFA score in predicting the mortality of patients with Kp-BSI; moreover, the organ-based SOFA sub-scores are not specific for K. pneumoniae infections. In pediatric patients with sepsis, the age-adapted SOFA score is a promising prognostic instrument [12], but it has not been validated in children with a specific type of infection. Overall, risk factors and early predictors of mortality in children with Kp-BSI have not been thoroughly investigated.

In this study, we aimed to identify prognostic predictors of mortality and evaluate whether consecutive combination of pediatric SOFA score with clinical characteristics or biomarkers could improve the score ' s ability to predict mortality in a cohort of pediatric patients with Kp-BSI.

## Methods

## Study design

This was a 10-year retrospective cohort study conducted at Xinhua Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, a 3000-bed tertiary care university teaching hospital in Shanghai, China. Pediatric patients ( ≤ 18 years old) diagnosed with Kp-BSI between January 2009 and June 2019 were included in the study. Patients who were transferred from other hospitals were excluded. The primary outcome was the 90-day mortality after diagnosis of Kp-BSI; the 14- and 30-day mortality were also recorded. Discharged patients made routine visits to the clinic every month. Patient follow-up was performed retrospectively by phone interviews and by checking medical records. The study was approved by the ethics committee and the review board of Xinhua Hospital (ID: XHEC-C-2019-109) and complied with the ethical principles stated by the Declaration of Helsinki.

## Clinical data collection

All medical records of the enrolled patients were reviewed by a team of physicians from the microbiology department, the infectious diseases department, and the pediatric/neonatal intensive care unit. The following variables were collected from the medical charts: demographic characteristics (age, sex, admission year, and admission ward), birth status (preterm birth and cesarean delivery), the weight-for-age z-score (calculated using the Anthro software version 3.2.2) [13], comorbidities (congenital gastrointestinal anomalies, congenital heart diseases, and malignancies), probable source of infection, prior hospitalization in the last 6 months, invasive treatments before the onset of Kp-BSI (surgery, urinary catheterization, gastrointestinal decompression, sputum suction, and invasive ventilation), and levels of biomarkers (leukocyte counts, platelet counts, hemoglobin, procalcitonin, C-reactive protein, albumin, total bilirubin, creatinine, and lactate). The severity of organ failure was measured using SOFA score age-adapted for children [12]. The level of biomarkers and risk scores at the time of Kp-BSI onset were determined within 24 h after the index blood culture [14]. The definitive antimicrobial treatments, which defined as the agents used for the longest duration within the first week after the index blood culture [15], were recorded for children with CR-Kp bloodstream infection.

## Definitions and methods of microbiology

A case of bloodstream infection was defined as positive blood cultures from two separate venipuncture sites. A solitary blood culture was considered contaminated and excluded from the analysis [16]. Bloodstream infections were considered healthcare-associated in patients who stayed in the hospital for more than 48 h or fulfilled other published criteria [17]. K. pneumoniae isolates were identified by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization time-of-flight mass spectrometry (MALDITOF MS, Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany). The antibiotic susceptibilities of the isolates were determined using Vitek 2 automated system (BioMérieux, Marcy l ' Etoile, France), combined with a disk diffusion method. The results were interpreted according to the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute criteria [18]. Isolates resistant to at least one carbapenem were considered carbapenem-resistant. Polymicrobial bloodstream infections were defined as the isolation of more than one bacterial species from a set of blood culture bottles [19]. Intra-abdominal infection was broadly defined as localized or diffuse peritoneal inflammation caused by microorganisms. The source of the bloodstream infection and the specific infection sites were determined by two investigators according to the standard definitions by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention [20].

## Statistical analysis

Continuous variables with normal distribution were presented as mean ± standard deviation; non-normal variables were presented as median and interquartile range; and categorical variables were described as frequencies. Differences in continuous variables between survivors and non-survivors were compared using the Student ' s t -test or the nonparametric Mann-Whitney U

test. Proportions were compared using the χ -squared test for large samples, and the Fisher ' s exact probability test for small samples. To estimate the association between patients ' clinical characteristics and mortality, we evaluated the hazard ratio (HR) and the 95% confidence interval (CI) using the Cox proportional hazard model. We grouped the levels of procalcitonin, C-reactive protein, and albumin within the interquartile range (between P25 and P75) for the regression analysis. We used a multivariate Cox regression adjusted for baseline characteristics (age, sex, admission year, and admission ward) to identify independent risk factors of mortality. Risk factors with P &lt; 0.10 in the Cox analysis were introduced stepwise into the predictive model as additional components of the SOFA score. Receiver operating characteristic curves were analyzed and each respective area under the curve (AUC) was calculated to evaluate the discriminatory power of single parameters and combined models for prediction of mortality.

To quantify the incremental value of the modified SOFA scores, we compared the predictive performance of the models using the DeLong ' s test [21] and the integrated discrimination improvement index [22]. An optimal score (Kp-specific SOFA) was established using the model reported by Sullivan et al. [23]. Three cut-off points of the risk score were selected to stratify patients at three-tiered risk corresponded to the observed mortality rates. The Kaplan-Meier curves and log-rank tests were used to compare survival between risk-stratified patients. A two-tailed P -value of less than 0.05 was considered statistically significant. The R software version 3.6.1 (http://www.R-project.org) and the EmpowerStats (www.empowerstats.com; X&amp;Y Solutions, Inc., Boston, MA, USA) were used for all statistical analyses.

## Results

## Characteristics of the study population

During the study period (January 2009 to June 2019) there were 50,000 estimated admissions per year in pediatric wards at Xinhua Hospital, and 154 (0.03%) patients were diagnosed with Kp-BSI. Eight (5.5%) patients were lost to follow-up; a total of 146 patients were included in this retrospective study. Overall, 20 (13.7%), 25 (17.1%), and 33 (22.6%) patients died within 14, 30, and 90 days from Kp-BSI onset, respectively.

The median age of patients was 2.7 months (interquartile range: 1.0, 10.9 months, Table 1). Bloodstream infections were mainly secondary to pneumonia (50.0%), followed by intra-abdominal infection (20.5%) and indwelling central catheters (6.8%). Primary bacteremia occurred in 22.6% of patients (Table 2). Most of the KpBSI (84.9%) cases were healthcare-associated, and nearly half of the patients (48.6%) were infected with CR-Kp. The most common organ failure within 24 h from Kp-