<!-- image -->

<!-- image -->

## Factors predicting long-term survival of patients with sepsis on arrival at the emergency department

## A single-center, observational study

Jiyeon Roh, MD a , Eun-Jung Jo, MD a , Jung Seop Eom, MD a , Jeongha Mok, MD a , Mi Hyun Kim, MD a , Ki Uk Kim, MD a , Hye-Kyung Park, MD a , Min Ki Lee, MD a , Seokran Yeom, MD b , Kwangha Lee, MD a, ∗

## Abstract

Predicting long-term outcomes after sepsis is important when caring for patients with this condition. The purpose of the present study was to develop models predicting long-term mortality of patients with sepsis, including septic shock.

Retrospective data from 446 patients with sepsis (60.8% men; median age, 71 years) treated at a single university-af fi liated tertiary care hospital over 3 years were reviewed. Binary logistic regression was used to identify factors predicting mortality at 180 and 365 days after arrival at the emergency department. Long-term prognosis scores for the 180- and 365-day models were calculated by assigning points to variables according to their b coef fi cients.

The 180- and 365-day mortality rates were 40.6% and 47.8%, respectively. Multivariate analysis identi fi ed the following factors for inclusion in the 180- and 365-day models: age ≥ 65 years, body mass index  18.5kg/m 2 , hemato-oncologic diseases as comorbidities, and ventilator care. Patients with scores of 0 to ≥ 3 had 180-day survival rates of 83.8%, 70.8%, 42.3%, and 25.0%, respectively, and 365-day survival rates of 72.1%, 64.6%, 36.2%, and 15.9%, respectively (all differences P &lt; .001; log-rank test). The areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves of the 180- and 365-day models were 0.713 (95% con fi dence interval [CI] 0.668 -0.756, P &lt; .001) and 0.697 (95% CI 0.650 -0.740, P &lt; .001), respectively.

These long-term prognosis models based on baseline patient characteristics and treatments are useful for predicting the 6- and 12-month mortality rates of patients with sepsis.

Abbreviations: APACHE = acute physiology and chronic health evaluation, AUC = areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves, BMI = body mass index, CI = con fi dence interval, ED = emergency department, ICU = intensive care unit, IQR = interquartile range, OR = odds ratio, SOFA = sequential organ failure assessment, SSC = surviving sepsis campaign.

Keywords: emergency department, long-term prognosis, sepsis

## 1. Introduction

The aging of populations and increases in the numbers of elderly patients with comorbidities have resulted in increases in the incidence of sepsis. [1 -3] Although sepsis guidelines were revised

Editor: Giuseppe Insalaco.

This work was supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korean government (Ministry of Science and ICT) (2016R1C1B1008529).

The authors have no con fl icts of interest to disclose.

a Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, b Department of Emergency Medicine, Pusan National University School of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.

∗ Correspondence: Kwangha Lee, Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Pusan National University School of Medicine, 179 Gudeok-ro, Seo-gu, Busan, 49241, Republic of Korea (e-mail: jubilate@pusan.ac.kr).

Copyright © 2019 the Author(s). Published by Wolters Kluwer Health, Inc. This is an open access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution-Non Commercial-No Derivatives License 4.0 (CCBY-NCND), where it is permissible to download and share the work provided it is properly cited. The work cannot be changed in any way or used commercially without permission from the journal.

[Medicine (2019) 98:33(e16871)](http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000016871)

Received: 14 March 2019 / Received in fi nal form: 27 June 2019 / Accepted: 25 July 2019

http://dx.doi.org/10.1097/MD.0000000000016871

recently, [1,4] sepsis and septic shock are responsible for high morbidity and mortality rates in the intensive care unit (ICU). [5,6] Moreover, many patients who survive sepsis have long-term physical, psychological, and cognitive disabilities, which have signi fi cant healthcare and social implications. [7]

According to the surviving sepsis campaign (SSC), early recognition and management of sepsis is associated with better outcomes. [1,4] Several screening tools, including Early Warning scores and quick-Sepsis-Related Organ Failure Assessment scores, have been used to predict mortality in patients with suspected sepsis. [8 -11] However, the clinical utility of these tools has focused primarily on predicting short-term prognosis. In addition to acute in-hospital mortality, sepsis and septic shock are associated with impaired quality of life and increased longterm mortality following hospital discharge. [12] Therefore, predicting long-term outcomes is important when caring for patients with sepsis.

Although several severity of illness scores, including the Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation (APACHE) II and Sequential Organ Failure Assessment (SOFA) scores, are useful for predicting patient outcomes, [13,14] long-term outcomes after sepsis are associated with a complex interplay among patient demographics, comorbidities, risk factors for critical illnesses, and treatment in the ICU. [2,15,16] The association of each of these factors with long-term prognosis, however, remains unclear. We hypothesized that long-term prognostic models based on the baseline characteristics of patients at the time of ICU admission (e.g., demographic characteristics, comorbidities, primary site of infection, and treatments) could be developed for patients with sepsis.

The aim of the present study therefore was to investigate prognostic indicators for predicting long-term mortality and to develop models prognostic of 180and 365-day survival in patients with sepsis, including septic shock, who are admitted to the emergency department (ED). The ability of these models to predict mortality was compared with that of 2 widely used severity of illness scores.

## 2. Materials and methods

## 2.1. Study design and subjects

This retrospective, observational study included patients admitted to a 12-bed medical ICU in a 1100-bed university-af fi liated tertiary care hospital in Korea. This medical ICU has full cardiovascular facilities and close airway monitoring, with a nurse-to-bed ratio of 1:3. The physician staff of the medical ICU included one full-time ICU specialist, one clinical fellow in pulmonary and critical care medicine, and one resident physician in internal medicine. All subjects were managed according to therapeutic recommendations, which were based on a lungprotective ventilator strategy. [17]

All adult subjects admitted to the medical ICU via the ED between July 1, 2014, and June 30, 2017, were screened, and subjects diagnosed with sepsis and septic shock were enrolled in the study. The de fi nitions of sepsis and septic shock were based on sepsis-3 criteria. [18] Subjects aged &lt; 18 years and those with irreversible brain injury, acute or chronic neuromuscular diseases, ventilator care prior to ICU admission, and insuf fi cient data on characteristics or outcomes were excluded. All investigators con fi rmed that the study objectives and procedures were disclosed honestly, and that they had full access to all data. Case report forms were completed for each included subject and the data were collected. Because of the characteristic of retrospective study, missing data could not be addressed.

The primary study outcome was mortality at 1-year after arrival in the ED. The study protocol was approved by the institutional review board of Pusan National University Hospital (H-1901-005-074). Because of the observational nature of the study, the need for informed consent from enrolled subjects or their surrogates was waived. This study had no impact on the treatment of enrolled patients.

## 2.2. Data collection and de fi nitions

Demographic and clinical data were obtained retrospectively from the electronic medical records of each subject; these included age, sex, body mass index (BMI), and comorbidities before ICU admission. The severity of illness was measured using the APACHE II score, and accompanying organ failure was assessed according to SOFA score. [13,14] The APACHE II and SOFA scores were calculated based on laboratory and clinical data recorded on the day of ICU admission. The primary source of infection at the time of ICU admission and the presence of bacteremia (or fungemia) were also evaluated. Requirements for hemodialysis (de fi ned as the use of any form of renal replacement therapy) and ventilator care on the day of ICU admission were determined by assessing uses of medical resources. Mortality at

180 and 365 days after arrival in the ED among patients discharged from the hospital was assessed by review of the National Health Insurance Service Database. Additional outcomes variables included duration of ventilator care and ICU and hospital outcomes.

## 2.3. Statistical analysis

Continuous variables are expressed as the median (interquartile range [IQR]) and compared using Student t test or the Mann -Whitney U test, as applicable. Categorical variables are expressed as numbers (percentages) and compared using the chi-squared test or Fisher exact test (for small numbers), as applicable. Factors independently predictive of 180-, and 365-day mortality rates were identi fi ed by stepwise logistic regression analyses. In addition, the b -coef fi cients derived from multiple logistic regression were simpli fi ed as natural numbers &gt; 0; these factors were calculated as the sum of simpli fi ed b -coef fi cients, as described. [19,20] Hence, the prognostic models were based on the sum of b coef fi cients. Model discrimination was assessed by measuring the areas under the receiver operating characteristic curves (AUCs), and model calibration was assessed using the Hosmer -Lemeshow test. Kaplan -Meier estimates of 180- and 365-day mortality were strati fi ed according to the prognostic models developed in this study and curves were compared using log-rank tests. The AUCs of all prognostic models were compared with the AUCs of APACHE II and SOFA scores using DeLong test, as described. [21] Determination of optimal cut-off values for the models was based on the maximum Youden index. [22] All tests were two-tailed and P values &lt; .05 were considered statistically signi fi cant. All analyses were performed using SPSS version 24.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc., Chicago, IL) and MedCalc version 18.11.3 (MedCalc Software bvba, Ostend, Belgium).

## 3. Results

## 3.1. General characteristics

During the study period, 1145 patients were admitted to the medical ICU. Of these, 446 (38.9%) were diagnosed with sepsis and/or septic shock, including 169 diagnosed with septic shock upon arrival at the ED (Fig. 1). Table 1 shows the baseline characteristics and clinical outcomes of these patients. The most commonunderlying disease and source of infection were diabetes mellitus (34.5%) and respiratory infection (56.7%), respectively. One hundred sixty-nine patients (37.9%) were diagnosed as

Figure 1. Flowchart of recruited and enrolled study participants.

<!-- image -->

## Table 1

| Baseline characteristics and outcomes of all enrolled patients.                       | Baseline characteristics and outcomes of all enrolled patients.   |
|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|-------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Variables                                                                             | N = 446                                                           |
| Age, y                                                                                | 71 (18 - 95)                                                      |
| Male                                                                                  | 271 (60.8)                                                        |
| Body mass index, kg/m 2                                                               | 22.1 (11.5 - 42.6)                                                |
| Comorbidities                                                                         |                                                                   |
| Diabetes mellitus                                                                     | 154 (34.5)                                                        |
| Chronic heart diseases (ischemic heart diseases, arrhythmia, valvular heart diseases) | 112 (25.1)                                                        |
| Neurologic diseases (cerebrovascular diseases, neuromuscular diseases)                | 94 (21.1)                                                         |
| Hemato-oncologic diseases                                                             | 75 (16.8)                                                         |
| Chronic lung diseases                                                                 | 61 (13.7)                                                         |
| Chronic kidney diseases                                                               | 43 (9.6)                                                          |
| Chronic liver diseases                                                                | 36 (8.1)                                                          |
| Alimentary diseases                                                                   | 19 (4.3)                                                          |
| Biliary diseases                                                                      | 16 (3.6)                                                          |
| Source of infection                                                                   |                                                                   |
| Respiratory                                                                           | 253 (56.7)                                                        |
| Intra-abdominal                                                                       | 71 (15.9)                                                         |
| Urinary tract                                                                         | 51 (11.4)                                                         |
| Musculoskeletal                                                                       | 27 (6.1)                                                          |
| Infective endocarditis                                                                | 10 (2.2)                                                          |
| Neutropenic                                                                           | 6 (1.3)                                                           |
| Neurologic (brain abscess, meningitis)                                                | 5 (1.1)                                                           |
| Others                                                                                | 23 (5.2)                                                          |
| Severity of illness at admission APACHE II score                                      | 20 (5 - 53)                                                       |
| SOFA score                                                                            | 8 (2 - 19)                                                        |
| Presence of bacteremia (or fungemia)                                                  | 55 (12.3)                                                         |
| Septic shock upon arrival at the emergency department                                 | 169 (37.9)                                                        |
| Requirement for ventilator care on day of ICU admission                               | 154 (34.5)                                                        |
| Requirement for hemodialysis ∗ on day of ICU admission                                | 53 (11.9)                                                         |
| ICU LOS, days                                                                         | 9 (1 - 550)                                                       |
| Hospital LOS, days                                                                    | 19 (1 - 550)                                                      |
| ICU mortality                                                                         | 96 (21.5)                                                         |
| Hospital mortality                                                                    | 108 (24.2)                                                        |
| 180-day cumulative mortality                                                          | 181 (40.6)                                                        |
| 365-day cumulative mortality                                                          | 213 (47.8)                                                        |

∗ De fi ned as use of any form of renal replacement therapy during hospital stay.

Continuous variables are presented as the median (range) and categorical variables as a number (%). APACHE II = Acute Physiology and Chronic Health Evaluation II, ICU = intensive care unit, LOS = length of stay, SOFA = sequential organ failure assessment.

septic shock at arrival on ED. Their 180- and 365-day mortality rates were 40.6% and 47.8%, respectively.

When we compared with survivors and nonsurvivors, nonsurvivors had signi fi cantly high rate of age ≥ 65 years, BMI  18.5 kg/m 2 , hemato-oncologic diseases as comorbidities, respiratory infections as primary source of infection and ventilator care during ICU stay (Table 2).

Table 2

## Clinical characteristics with signi fi cant differences between survivors and nonsurvivors.

|                                            | 180-day mortality   | 180-day mortality      | 180-day mortality   | 365-day mortality   | 365-day mortality      | 365-day mortality   |
|--------------------------------------------|---------------------|------------------------|---------------------|---------------------|------------------------|---------------------|
| Variables                                  | Survivors (n = 265) | Nonsurvivors (n = 181) | P -value            | Survivors (n = 233) | Nonsurvivors (n = 213) | P -value            |
| Age ≥ 65 years                             | 161 (60.8)          | 140 (77.3)             | < .001              | 143 (61.4)          | 158 (74.2)             | .005                |
| BMI < 18.5kg/m 2                           | 26 (9.8)            | 50 (27.6)              | < .001              | 21 (9.0)            | 55 (25.8)              | < .001              |
| Hemato-oncologic diseases as comorbidities | 32 (12.1)           | 43 (23.8)              | .002                | 22 (9.4)            | 53 (24.9)              | < .001              |
| Ventilator care                            | 131 (49.4)          | 122 (67.4)             | < .001              | 118 (50.6)          | 135 (63.4)             | .007                |
| Source of infection: respiratory           | 67 (25.3)           | 87 (48.1)              | < .001              | 61 (26.2)           | 93 (43.7)              | < .001              |

All variables are presented as a number (%). BMI = body mass index.

## 3.2. Long-term prognoses at 180 and 365 days

Table 3 shows the results of univariate and multivariate analyses of risk factors predicting 180- and 365-day mortality. In the multivariate analyses, 4 factors (age ≥ 65 years, BMI  18.5kg/ m 2 , hemato-oncologic diseases as comorbidities, and ventilator care during ICU stay) were signi fi cant prognostic indicators on 180and 365-day mortality, respectively. Based on the b coef fi cients observed in multivariate analyses, 4 factors were associated with mortality at both time points (Table 2): age ≥ 65 years (+ 1 point); BMI  18.5kg/m 2 (+1 point); hemato-oncologic diseases as comorbidities (+1 point); and ventilator care during ICU stay (+1 point). The models had acceptable discrimination (AUCs of 0.716 and 0.700 for the 180- and 365-day models, respectively), and calibration (Hosmer and Lemeshow chi-square 4.593 with 6 df and P = .597 for the 180-day model, and Hosmer and Lemeshow chi-square 4.977 with 5 df and P = .419 for the 365-day model). Kaplan -Meier survival analyses of the 180 and 365-day models based on model scores are shown in Fig. 2A and B, respectively. The 180-day survival rates among patients with scores of 0 to ≥ 3 were 83.8%, 70.8%, 42.3%, and 25.0%, respectively, and the 365-day survival rates among patients with scores of 0 to ≥ 3 were 72.1%, 64.6%, 36.2%, and 15.9%, respectively ( P &lt; .001 for all; log-rank test). The AUCs of the 180day and 365-day models were 0.713 (95% CI, 0.668 -0.756; P &lt; .001) and 0.697 (95% CI, 0.650 -0.740; P &lt; .001), respectively. The cut-off score for each of these models for predicting mortality based on the maximum Youden index was ≥ 1, with the 180-day model having a sensitivity of 73% and a speci fi city of 63% and the 365-day model having a sensitivity of 75% and a speci fi city of 59%.

## 3.3. Comparison with severity of illness scores

When comparing the AUCs of both the 180-day and 365-day models with 2 severity of illness scores (APACHE II and SOFA scores obtained on the day of ICU admission), we found that the AUCs of the 180- and 365-day models did not differ signi fi cantly from the AUCs of the APACHE II scores (Fig. 3A, B). However, the AUCs of the 3 above models were signi fi cantly higher than the AUCs of the SOFA score.

## 3.4. Impact of surviving sepsis campaign bundle on longterm prognoses

Because the sepsis bundle was central to implementation of SSC guideline, [1,23,24] we investigated whether the sepsis bundle would be an important long-term prognostic factor in our patient