## RESEARCH

## Open Access

## A multicentre prospective registry of one thousand sepsis patients admitted in Indian ICUs: (SEPSIS INDIA) study

<!-- image -->

Subhash Todi 1* , Yatin Mehta 2 , Kapil Zirpe 3 , Subhal Dixit 4 , Atul P . Kulkarni 5,10 , Sushma Gurav 3 , Shweta Ram Chandankhede 6 , Deepak Govil 2 , Amitabha Saha 7 , Arpit Kumar Saha 7 , Sumalatha Arunachala 8,19 , Kapil Borawake 9 , Shilpushp Bhosale 5,10 , Sumit Ray 11 , Ruchi Gupta 11 , Swarna Deepak Kuragayala 12 , Srinivas Samavedam 13 , Mehul Shah 14 , Ashit Hegde 15 , Palepu Gopal 16 , Abdul Samad Ansari 17 , Ajoy Krishna Sarkar 18 , Rahul Pandit 14 Other contributors to SEPSIS Registry

## Abstract

Background Sepsis is a global health problem with high morbidity and mortality. Low- and middle-income countries have a higher incidence and poorer outcome with sepsis. Large epidemiological studies in sepsis using Sepsis-3 criteria, addressing the process of care and deriving predictors of mortality are scarce in India.

Method A multicentre, prospective sepsis registry was conducted using Sepsis 3 criteria of suspected or confirmed infection and SOFA score of 2 or more in 19 ICUs in India over a period of one year (August 2022-July 2023). All adult patients admitted to the Intensive Care Unit who fulfilled the Sepsis 3 criteria for sepsis and septic shock were included. Patient infected with Covid 19 were excluded. Patients demographics, severity, admission details, initial resuscitation, laboratory and microbiological data and clinical outcome were recorded. Performance improvement programs as recommended by the Surviving Sepsis guideline were noted from the participating centers. Patients were followed till discharge or death while in hospital.

Results Registry Data of 1172 patients with sepsis (including 500 patients with septic shock) were analysed. The average age of the study cohort was 65 years, and 61% were male. The average APACHE II and SOFA score was 21 and 6.7 respectively. The majority of patients had community-acquired infections, and lung infections were the most common source. Of all culture positive results, 65% were gram negative organism. Carbapenem-resistance was identified in 50% of the gram negative blood culture isolates. The predominant gram negative organisms were Klebsiella spp (25%), Escherechia coli (24%) and Acinetobacter Spp (11%). Tropical infections (Dengue, Malaria, Typhus) constituted minority (n = 32, 2.2%) of sepsis patients. The observed hospital mortality for the entire cohort (n = 1172) was 36.3%, for those without shock (n = 672) it was 25.6% and for those with shock (n = 500) it was 50.8%. The average length of ICU and hospital stay for the study cohort was 8.64 and 11.9 respectively. In multivariate analysis adequate source control, correct choice of empiric antibiotic and the use of intravenous thiamine were protective.

Conclusion The general demographics of the sepsis population in the Indian Sepsis Registry is comparable to Western population. The mortality of sepsis cohort was higher (36.3%) but septic shock mortality (50.8%) was comparable

*Correspondence: Subhash Todi drsubhashtodi@gmail.com Full list of author information is available at the end of the article

<!-- image -->

© The Author(s) 2024. Open Access This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International License, which permits any non-commercial use, sharing, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence, and indicate if you modified the licensed material. You do not have permission under this licence to share adapted material derived from this article or parts of it. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the article's Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the article's Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder. To view a copy of this licence, visit http://  creat  iveco  mmons.  org/  licen  ses/  by-  nc-  nd/4.  0/.

to Western reports. Gram negative infection was the predominant cause of sepsis with a high incidence of carbapenem resistance. Eschericia coli, Klebsiella Spp and Acinetobacter Spp were the predominant causative organism. Tropical infection constituted a minority of sepsis population with low hospital mortality. The SOFA score on admission was a comparatively better predictor of poor outcome. Sepsis secondary to nosocomial infections had the worst outcomes, while source control, correct empirical antibiotic selection, and intravenous thiamine were protective. CTRI Registration CTRI:2022/07/044516.

Keywords Sepsis, Registry, Epidemiology, Intensive Care Unit, India

## Background

Sepsis,  a  dysregulated  host  response  to  an  infection,  is a global health problem and an important cause of hospitalization  and  mortality  in  the  ICU  [1].  Reports  from Global burden of disease study had estimated 48 · 9  million cases of sepsis and 110 million sepsis-related deaths worldwide,  representing  19 · 7%  of  all  global  deaths  [2]. The highest burden of sepsis incidence and mortality is from  low-  and  middle-income  countries  (LMIC).  Most of the epidemiological data on sepsis has been published from  high-income  countries,  reporting  lower  mortality  [3]  Sepsis  epidemiological  data  from  India  has  been mostly  retrospective,  single-centre  studies  with  small sample sizes  using  older  definitions  of  sepsis,  or  a  subset of large datasets from point prevalence studies [4, 5, 10, 19]. There have been a few multi-centre point prevalence studies using the current criteria of sepsis but many studies  have  focused  mainly  on  the  incidence  of  antibiotic resistance in Indian polulation [6]. We conducted a multicentre,  prospective  study  on  sepsis  using  a  sepsis registry with a large sample size using Sepsis 3 criteria to define sepsis and septic shock admitted to the ICU. Predictors  of  adverse  outcomes  during  hospital  stays  were derived from the observed data. We aimed to contribute to  existing  literature  and  identify  clinical  practice  variability and areas of further research on the subject.

## Method

The study is  a  research  initiative  of  Sepsis  Forum  India (SFI-https://  sepsi  sforum.  in), which is a scientific organization  created  to  improve  awareness,  promote educational activities, and research in sepsis. The scientific  committee  of  SFI  was  responsible  for  conceptualisation, study design, site selection, and constructing the electronic  case  record  (e-CRF.)  form.  Site  selection  was based on previous experience with sepsis research of the principal investigator (PI), who expressed interest in the project  and  the  availability  of  adequate  infrastructure. Nineteen  sites  were  selected  that  satisfied  the  criteria for  Level  III  ICU  (for  tertiary  care  hospitals  with  more than  150  beds  including  medical  colleges  and  corporate hospitals) with all advanced ICU facilities including extracorporeal support as defined by the Indian Society of Critical Care Medicine (ISCCM) [7]. The Sepsis registry  steering  committee held multiple meetings with the PI and the data collection team prior to the commencement  of  the  registry.  Patient  enrolment  in  the  Sepsis registry was conducted over one-year period starting on 1st  August  2022  until  31st  July,  2023.  All  adult  patients (aged &gt; 18 years) admitted to ICU during the study period with  suspected  (subsequently  confirmed)  or  confirmed infection as per the treating team, based on clinical and laboratory  variables,  were  identified.  SOFA  scores  were calculated within 24 h of screening and if a score of 2 or more (or 2 more than the baseline if known) was found, those patients were enrolled in the registry. Both newly admitted patients and those already in the ICU who fulfilled  the  above criteria were enrolled. Sepsis and septic shock were defined according to the Sepsis-3 definition [8]. Patients less than 18 years of age, those with no suspicion  of  infection,  SOFA  scores  of  less  than  two,  and, those  infected  with  SARS-COV-2  were  excluded  from the  study.  All  data  were  collected  prospectively  and patients were followed until hospital discharge or death.

Data  collection  and  entry  into  the  registry  were  performed  in  a  standardized  manner,  using  an  electronic case  record  form  (Supplement  1).  Systematic  data  collection was conducted under ten different sections for all patients entered into the registry. This dataset captured over one hundred different parameters related to patient demographics, initial resuscitation laboratory values, microbiological  data,  processes  of  sepsis  care,  and  outcomes (Supplement 2).

The  objective  was  to  study  the  demographics  of  this population,  determine  the  prognostic  ability  of  severity scoring  markers  and  mortality  outcomes,  analyse  sepsis  care  processes  such  as  initial  resuscitation,  clinical and  laboratory  parameters,  antibiotic  use,  microbiology details, course in the hospital, and adjunctive sepsis treatment. This study was conducted in compliance with the  principles  of  the  Declaration  of  Helsinki  and  local regulatory  requirements.  Ethical  approval  was  obtained from the individual Institutional Review Board or Ethics Committee  of  the  participating  centres.  Informed  consent was obtained if required by the ethical committee of centres, from study participants or their legal representatives  before  enrolment  in  the  registry.  The  registry  was also registered with the Trial Registry Database in India (CTRI)  (CTRI:2022/07/044516).  Registry  data  was  collected,  analysed  and  reported  as  per  Registry  reporting guideline [45].

## Statistical analysis

Descriptive statistics were used to summarize the demographic  and  clinical  characteristics  of  the  study  cohort. Continuous variables were reported as means with standard deviations or medians with interquartile ranges (IQR) based  on  their  distribution.  Categorical  variables  were presented as frequencies and percentages. For comparing parameters between those with or without the outcome of death, Chi-square test or Fisher's exact test was used for categorical data comparisons, while t-tests or MannWhitney  U  tests  were  used  for  continuous  data  comparisons, as appropriate. We conducted a comprehensive univariate  analysis  of  the  dataset  comprising  117  variables for predicting hospital mortality. Variables found to be significant were further explored through multivariate binary logistic  regression  analysis,  with  the  aim  of  constructing  predictive  models  that  determine  the  binary outcome  of  interest.  Goodness  of  fit  model  showed  an accuracy rate of 89.4%. Moreover, the Hosmer and Lemeshow  Test,  with  a p -value  of  0.428,  suggested  that  the model adequately fit the data.

Mortality predictions of severity scoring methods  (SIRS,  qSOFA  and  SOFA)  were  constructed  using Receiver  Operating  Curve  (ROC)  curve  testing.  Discriminatory  power  was  determined  by  comparing  the area  under  the  receiver  operating  curve  (AUC  ROC) for  each  of  SIRS,  qSOFA  and  SOFA  scores  individually (unadjusted analysis) with a 95% confidence interval (CI). Z statistic as described by Hanley and McNeil was used to  compare the differences in the AUC of the scores in the sepsis patients. All statistical tests were 2-sided, and p &lt;  0.05 was considered statistically significant.

The results from the logistic regression models and the ROC curve analysis were used to identify significant predictors  of  mortality  and  evaluate  predictive  accuracy  in the  context  of  specific  patient  subgroups.  All  statistical analyses  were  conducted  using  statistical  software  (e.g., SPSS version 26 and R.03, MedCalc ® Statistical Software version 22.021).

## Results

Over a period of one year, data were prospectively collected from the 19 participating centres, identifying 1457 patients as having sepsis or septic shock as per the sepsis 3 criteria. The final cohort after data cleaning consisted of  1172  ICU  patients,  of  which  672  (58%)  patients  had sepsis and 500 (42%) patients had septic shock.

The average age of the entire study cohort was 65 years, with 61% being male. The average APACHE II and SOFA scores  were  21  and  6.7,  respectively.  The  respective  figures  for  patients  with  septic  shock  were  60  years,  60% male, APACHE II of 26, and SOFA of 8.3. The majority of patients were transferred from the emergency department  and  had  community-acquired  infections,  which were the primary reasons for ICU admission. The average BMI was 20 and Charlson Comorbidity index was 3 for the entire study cohort. The lung was the most common source  of  infection  (38%)  followed  by  urosepsis  (32%) (Table 1).

The  observed  hospital  mortality  rate  of  the  study cohort (n = 1172), for sepsis without shock (n = 672), and for  septic  shock  (n = 500),  was  36.3%,  25.6%  and  50.8% ( p &lt;  0.001)  respectively.  The  predicted  hospital  mortality rate (PMR) as per APACHE II was 40%, 25% and 55%, and  the  standardised  mortality  ratio  (SMR = Observed Mortality Rate /PMR) was 0.9,1.02 and 0.92 respectively (Table 2).

The mean length of stay in the ICU for the entire study cohort,  sepsis  and  septic  shock  was  8.64,  8.76  and  8.47 days ( p = 0.617), respectively.  The  corresponding  figures  for  Hospital  length  of  stay  were  11.99,  12.19  and 11 0.71 days ( p = 0.50),  respectively  (Table 2). Discharge against  Medical  Advice  (DAMA)  was  noted  in  14%  of patients.

SOFA, qSOFA and SIRS were assessed on the day of sepsis  diagnosis.  SOFA  score  exhibited  a  significantly higher Area under the curve (AUC) of 0.768 as opposed to qSOFA and SIRS of 0.70 and 0.54 respectively.

An  initial  univariate  analysis  was  conducted  on  the dataset comprising 99 variables. The demographic, clinical,  and  laboratory  characteristics  in  the  study  cohorts are  presented  in  Table  3,  which  lists  the  variables  and performs a comparative analysis among these parameters between deceased and surviving subjects (Supplement 4).

In univariate analyses, multiple demographic variables were  associated  with  unfavorable  outcomes.  Significant among  these  were  male  gender,  high  BMI,  high  Charlson  comorbidity  index,  transfer  to  ICU  from  the  ward, and nosocomial infection. Certain clinical  variables  like septic shock, and clinical features of hypoperfusion were also associated with worse outcomes. Laboratory parameters such as low pH, low bicarbonate, low platelet count, high  sodium,  high  creatinine,  lower  albumin  and  low glucose  values  were  significantly  associated  with  poor outcomes. During initial resuscitation, less fluid infused within 1 and 3 h, increased lactate, vasopressor use and albumin  infusion  were  associated  with  poor  outcomes. Normal saline was the most common resuscitation fluid